<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion (Third Edition, Vol. 11 of 12)</title>
      <title type="sub">Balder the Beautiful, Vol. 2 of 2.</title>
      <author><name reg="Frazer, James George">James George Frazer</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="3">Edition 3</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>July 9, 2013</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">43433</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="sa"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="ar"></language>
      <language id="sv"></language>
      <language id="gv"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="nl"></language>
      <language id="kw"></language>
      <language id="zh"></language>
      <language id="cy"></language>
      <language id="es"></language>
      <language id="it"></language>
      <language id="gd"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2013-08-09">July 9, 2013</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Golden Bough</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A Study in Magic and Religion</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">James George Frazer, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of Social Anthropology in the University of Liverpool</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. XI. of XII.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Part VII: Balder the Beautiful.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">The Fire-Festivals of Europe and the Doctrine of the External Soul.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. 2 of 2.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York and London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">MacMillan and Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1913</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
<figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>
</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Fire-Festivals in Other Lands.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Fire-walk.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Fire-walk.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bonfires at
the Pongol
festival in
Southern
India.</note>
At first sight the interpretation of the European fire customs
as charms for making sunshine is confirmed by a parallel
custom observed by the Hindoos of Southern India at the
Pongol or Feast of Ingathering. The festival is celebrated
in the early part of January, when, according to Hindoo
astrologers, the sun enters the tropic of Capricorn, and the
chief event of the festival coincides with the passage of the
sun. For some days previously the boys gather heaps of
sticks, straw, dead leaves, and everything that will burn. On
the morning of the first day of the festival the heaps are
fired. Every street and lane has its bonfire. The young
folk leap over the flames or pile on fresh fuel. This fire is
an offering to Sûrya, the sun-god, or to Agni, the deity of
fire; it <q>wakes him from his sleep, calling on him again to
gladden the earth with his light and heat.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. E. Gover, <q>The Pongol
Festival in Southern India,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, N.S., v.
(1870) pp. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> If this is
indeed the explanation which the people themselves give of
the festival, it seems decisive in favour of the solar explanation
of the fires; for to say that the fires waken the sun-god
from his sleep is only a metaphorical or mythical way
of saying that they actually help to rekindle the sun's light
and heat. But the hesitation which the writer indicates
between the two distinct deities of sun and fire seems to
prove that he is merely giving his own interpretation of
the rite, not reporting the views of the celebrants. If
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
that is so, the expression of his opinion has no claim to
authority.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bonfires at
the Holi
festival in
Northern
India.
The village
priest
expected
to pass
through
the fire.
Leaping
over the
ashes of
the fire to
get rid of
disease.</note>
A festival of Northern India which presents points of
resemblance to the popular European celebrations which we
have been considering is the Holi. This is a village festival
held in early spring at the full moon of the month Phalgun.
Large bonfires are lit and young people dance round them.
The people believe that the fires prevent blight, and that
the ashes cure disease. At Barsana the local village priest
is expected to pass through the Holi bonfire, which, in the
opinion of the faithful, cannot burn him. Indeed he holds
his land rent-free simply on the score of his being fire-proof.
On one occasion when the priest disappointed the expectant
crowd by merely jumping over the outermost verge of the
smouldering ashes and then bolting into his cell, they
threatened to deprive him of his benefice if he did not discharge
his spiritual functions better when the next Holi
season came round. Another feature of the festival which
has, or once had, its counterpart in the corresponding
European ceremonies is the unchecked profligacy which
prevails among the Hindoos at this time.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), ii. 314 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Captain
G. R. Hearn, <q>Passing through the
Fire at Phalon,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Man</hi>, v. (1905) pp.
154 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the custom of walking
through fire, or rather over a furnace,
see Andrew Lang, <hi rend='italic'>Modern Mythology</hi>
(London, 1897), pp. 148-175; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
in <hi rend='italic'>Athenaeum</hi>, 26th August and 14th
October, 1899; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xii.
(1901) pp. 452-455; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
xiv. (1903) pp. 87-89. Mr. Lang was
the first to call attention to the wide
prevalence of the rite in many parts of
the world.</note> In Kumaon, a
district of North-West India, at the foot of the Himalayas,
each clan celebrates the Holi festival by cutting down a tree,
which is thereupon stripped of its leaves, decked with shreds of
cloth, and burnt at some convenient place in the quarter of
the town inhabited by the clan. Some of the songs sung
on this occasion are of a ribald character. The people leap
over the ashes of the fire, believing that they thus rid themselves
of itch and other diseases of the skin. While the
trees are burning, each clan tries to carry off strips of cloth
from the tree of another clan, and success in the attempt is
thought to ensure good luck. In Gwalior large heaps of
cow-dung are burnt instead of trees. Among the Marwaris
the festival is celebrated by the women with obscene songs
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
and gestures. A monstrous and disgusting image of a
certain Nathuram, who is said to have been a notorious
profligate, is set up in a bazaar and then smashed with blows
of shoes and bludgeons while the bonfire of cow-dung is
blazing. No household can be without an image of Nathuram,
and on the night when the bride first visits her husband, the
image of this disreputable personage is placed beside her
couch. Barren women and mothers whose children have
died look to Nathuram for deliverance from their troubles.<note place='foot'>Pandit Janardan Joshi, in <hi rend='italic'>North
Indian Notes and Queries</hi>, iii. pp. 92 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
§ 199 (September, 1893); W. Crooke,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of
Northern India</hi> (Westminster, 1896),
ii. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Various stories are told to account for the origin of the Holi
festival. According to one legend it was instituted in order
to get rid of a troublesome demon (<foreign lang='sa' rend='italic'>rákshasí</foreign>). The people
were directed to kindle a bonfire and circumambulate it,
singing and uttering fearlessly whatever might come into
their minds. Appalled by these vociferations, by the
oblations to fire, and by the laughter of the children, the
demon was to be destroyed.<note place='foot'>E. T. Atkinson, <q>Notes on the
History of Religion in the Himalayas of
the N.W. Provinces,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, liii. Part i.
(Calcutta, 1884) p. 60. Compare
W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and Folk-lore
of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), ii. 313 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Vernal
festival
of fire in
China. Ceremony
to ensure
an abundant
year. Walking
through
the fire. Ashes of
the fire
mixed with
the fodder
of the
cattle.</note>
In the Chinese province of Fo-Kien we also meet with
a vernal festival of fire which may be compared to the fire-festivals
of Europe. The ceremony, according to an eminent
authority, is a solar festival in honour of the renewal of
vegetation and of the vernal warmth. It falls in April, on
the thirteenth day of the third month in the Chinese calendar,
and is doubtless connected with the ancient custom of
renewing the fire, which, as we saw, used to be observed in
China at this season.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 136 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The chief performers in the ceremony
are labourers, who refrain from women for seven days,
and fast for three days before the festival. During these
days they are taught in the temple how to discharge the
difficult and dangerous duty which is to be laid upon
them. On the eve of the festival an enormous brazier
of charcoal, sometimes twenty feet wide, is prepared in
front of the temple of the Great God, the protector of life.
At sunrise next morning the brazier is lighted and kept
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
burning by fresh supplies of fuel. A Taoist priest throws a
mixture of salt and rice on the fire to conjure the flames and
ensure an abundant year. Further, two exorcists, barefooted
and followed by two peasants, traverse the fire again and
again till it is somewhat beaten down. Meantime the procession
is forming in the temple. The image of the god of the
temple is placed in a sedan-chair, resplendent with red paint
and gilding, and is carried forth by a score or more of barefooted
peasants. On the shafts of the sedan-chair, behind the
image, stands a magician with a dagger stuck through the upper
parts of his arms and grasping in each hand a great sword,
with which he essays to deal himself violent blows on the back;
however, the strokes as they descend are mostly parried by
peasants, who walk behind him and interpose bamboo rods
between his back and the swords. Wild music now strikes
up, and under the excitement caused by its stirring strains
the procession passes thrice across the furnace. At their
third passage the performers are followed by other peasants
carrying the utensils of the temple; and the rustic mob,
electrified by the frenzied spectacle, falls in behind. Strange
as it may seem, burns are comparatively rare. Inured from
infancy to walking barefoot, the peasants can step with
impunity over the glowing charcoal, provided they plant
their feet squarely and do not stumble; for usage has so
hardened their soles that the skin is converted into a sort of
leathery or horny substance which is almost callous to heat.
But sometimes, when they slip and a hot coal touches the
sides of their feet or ankles, they may be seen to pull a wry
face and jump out of the furnace amid the laughter of the
spectators. When this part of the ceremony is over, the
procession defiles round the village, and the priests distribute
to every family a leaf of yellow paper inscribed with a magic
character, which is thereupon glued over the door of the
house. The peasants carry off the charred embers from the
furnace, pound them to ashes, and mix the ashes with the
fodder of their cattle, believing that it fattens them. However,
the Chinese Government disapproves of these performances,
and next morning a number of the performers may
generally be seen in the hands of the police, laid face downwards
on the ground and receiving a sound castigation on a
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
part of their person which is probably more sensitive than
the soles of their feet.<note place='foot'>G. Schlegel, <hi rend='italic'>Uranographie Chinoise</hi>
(The Hague and Leyden, 1875), pp. 143
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>La fête de fouler le feu
célébrée en Chine et par les Chinois
à Java,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, ix. (1896) pp. 193-195.
Compare J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The
Religious System of China</hi>, vi. (Leyden,
1910) pp. 1292 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According to
Professor Schlegel, the connexion
between this festival and the old custom
of solemnly extinguishing and relighting
the fire in spring is unquestionable.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Passage of
the image
of the deity
through
the fire.
Passage
of inspired
men
through
the fire in
India.</note>
In this last festival the essential feature of the ceremony
appears to be the passage of the image of the deity across
the fire; it may be compared to the passage of the straw
effigy of Kupalo across the midsummer bonfire in Russia.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 262.</note>
As we shall see presently, such customs may perhaps be
interpreted as magical rites designed to produce light and
warmth by subjecting the deity himself to the heat
and glow of the furnace; and where, as at Barsana,
priests or sorcerers have been accustomed in the discharge
of their functions to walk through or over fire, they have
sometimes done so as the living representatives or embodiments
of deities, spirits, or other supernatural beings. Some
confirmation of this view is furnished by the beliefs and
practices of the Dosadhs, a low Indian caste in Behar and
Chota Nagpur. On the fifth, tenth, and full-moon days of
three months in the year, the priest walks over a narrow
trench filled with smouldering wood ashes, and is supposed
thus to be inspired by the tribal god Rahu, who becomes
incarnate in him for a time. Full of the spirit and also, it
is surmised, of drink, the man of god then mounts a bamboo
platform, where he sings hymns and distributes to the crowd
leaves of <foreign rend='italic'>tulsi</foreign>, which cure incurable diseases, and flowers
which cause barren women to become happy mothers. The
service winds up with a feast lasting far into the night, at
which the line that divides religious fervour from drunken
revelry cannot always be drawn with absolute precision.<note place='foot'>(Sir) H. H. Risley, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes and
Castes of Bengal, Ethnographic Glossary</hi>
(Calcutta, 1891-1892), i. 255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion
and Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 19; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes and
Castes of the North-Western Provinces
and Oudh</hi> (Calcutta, 1896), ii. 355.
According to Sir Herbert Risley, the
trench filled with smouldering ashes is
so narrow (only a span and a quarter
wide) <q>that very little dexterity would
enable a man to walk with his feet on
either edge, so as not to touch the
smouldering ashes at the bottom.</q></note>
Similarly the Bhuiyas, a Dravidian tribe of Mirzapur, worship
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
their tribal hero Bir by walking over a short trench filled with
fire, and they say that the man who is possessed by the hero
does not feel any pain in the soles of his feet.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes and Castes of
the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</hi>,
ii. 82.</note> Ceremonies
of this sort used to be observed in most districts of the Madras
Presidency, sometimes in discharge of vows made in time of
sickness or distress, sometimes periodically in honour of a
deity. Where the ceremony was observed periodically, it
generally occurred in March or June, which are the months of
the vernal equinox and the summer solstice respectively. A
narrow trench, sometimes twenty yards long and half a foot
deep, was filled with small sticks and twigs, mostly of tamarind,
which were kindled and kept burning till they sank into a
mass of glowing embers. Along this the devotees, often fifty
or sixty in succession, walked, ran, or leaped barefoot. In
1854 the Madras Government instituted an enquiry into
the custom, but found that it was not attended by danger
or instances of injury sufficient to call for governmental
interference.<note place='foot'>M. J. Walhouse, <q>Passing through
the Fire,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, vii.
(1878) pp. 126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare J. A.
Dubois, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs, Institutions et Cérémonies
des Peuples de l'Inde</hi> (Paris,
1825), ii. 373; E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographic
Notes in Southern India</hi>
(Madras, 1906), pp. 471-486; G. F.
D'Penha, in <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, xxxi.
(1902) p. 392; <q>Fire-walking in
Ganjam,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Madras Government Museum
Bulletin</hi>, vol. iv. No. 3 (Madras, 1903),
pp. 214-216. At Akka timanhully,
one of the many villages which help to
make up the town of Bangalore in
Southern India, one woman at least
from every house is expected to walk
through the fire at the village festival.
Captain J. S. F. Mackenzie witnessed
the ceremony in 1873. A trench, four
feet long by two feet wide, was filled
with live embers. The priest walked
through it thrice, and the women afterwards
passed through it in batches.
Capt. Mackenzie remarks: <q>From the
description one reads of walking through
fire, I expected something sensational.
Nothing could be more tame than the
ceremony we saw performed; in which
there never was nor ever could be the
slightest danger to life. Some young
girl, whose soles were tender, might
next morning find that she had a blister,
but this would be the extent of harm
she could receive.</q> See Captain J. S. F.
Mackenzie, <q>The Village Feast,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian
Antiquary</hi>, iii. (1874) pp. 6-9. But
to fall on the hot embers might result
in injuries which would prove fatal,
and such an accident is known to have
occurred at a village in Bengal. See
H. J. Stokes, <q>Walking through Fire,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, ii. (1873) pp. 190 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
At Afkanbour, five days' march from
Delhi, the Arab traveller Ibn Batutah
saw a troop of fakirs dancing and even
rolling on the glowing embers of a wood
fire. See <hi rend='italic'>Voyages d'Ibn Batoutah</hi>
(Paris, 1853-1858), ii. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, iii. 439.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hindoo
fire-festival
in
honour of
Darma
Rajah and
Draupadi. Worshippers
walking
through
the fire.</note>
The French traveller Sonnerat has described how, in the
eighteenth century, the Hindoos celebrated a fire-festival of
this sort in honour of the god Darma Rajah and his wife
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
Drobedé (Draupadi). The festival lasted eighteen days, during
which all who had vowed to take part in it were bound to
fast, to practise continence, to sleep on the ground without
a mat, and to walk on a furnace. On the eighteenth day
the images of Darma Rajah and his spouse were carried in
procession to the furnace, and the performers followed
dancing, their heads crowned with flowers and their bodies
smeared with saffron. The furnace consisted of a trench
about forty feet long, filled with hot embers. When the
images had been carried thrice round it, the worshippers
walked over the embers, faster or slower, according to the
degree of their religious fervour, some carrying their children
in their arms, others brandishing spears, swords, and standards.
This part of the ceremony being over, the bystanders
hastened to rub their foreheads with ashes from the furnace,
and to beg from the performers the flowers which they had
worn in their hair; and such as obtained them preserved
the flowers carefully. The rite was performed in honour of
the goddess Drobedé (Draupadi), the heroine of the great
Indian epic, the <hi rend='italic'>Mahabharata</hi>. For she married five brothers
all at once; every year she left one of her husbands to betake
herself to another, but before doing so she had to purify herself
by fire. There was no fixed date for the celebration of
the rite, but it could only be held in one of the first three
months of the year.<note place='foot'>Sonnerat, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage aux Indes orientales et à la Chine</hi> (Paris, 1782), i.
247 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some villages the ceremony is performed
annually; in others, which cannot afford the expense
every year, it is observed either at longer intervals, perhaps
once in three, seven, ten, or twelve years, or only in special
emergencies, such as the outbreak of smallpox, cholera, or
plague. Anybody but a pariah or other person of very low
degree may take part in the ceremony in fulfilment of a vow.
For example, if a man suffers from some chronic malady, he
may vow to Draupadi that, should he be healed of his disease,
he will walk over the fire at her festival. As a preparation
for the solemnity he sleeps in the temple and observes a fast.
The celebration of the rite in any village is believed to protect
the cattle and the crops and to guard the inhabitants from
dangers of all kinds. When it is over, many people carry
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
home the holy ashes of the fire as a talisman which will drive
away devils and demons.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Madras Government Museum,
Bulletin</hi>, vol. iv. No. 1 (Madras,
1901), pp. 55-59; E. Thurston,
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</hi>
(Madras, 1906), pp. 471-474. One
of the places where the fire-festival
in honour of Draupadi takes place
annually is the Allandur Temple, at
St. Thomas's Mount, near Madras.
Compare <q>Fire-walking Ceremony at
the Dharmaraja Festival,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Quarterly
Journal of the Mythic Society</hi>,
vol. ii. No. 1 (October, 1910), pp.
29-32.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fire-festival
of the
Badagas in
Southern
India.
Sacred fire
made by
friction.
Walking
through
the fire.
Cattle
driven over
the hot
embers. The fire-walk
preceded
by a
libation of
milk and
followed by
ploughing
and
sowing.</note>
The Badagas, an agricultural tribe of the Neilgherry Hills
in Southern India, annually celebrate a festival of fire in various
parts of their country. For example, at Nidugala the
festival is held with much ceremony in the month of January.
Omens are taken by boiling two pots of milk side by side
on two hearths. If the milk overflows uniformly on all sides,
the crops will be abundant for all the villages; but if it flows
over on one side only, the harvest will be good for villages
on that side only. The sacred fire is made by friction, a
vertical stick of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rhodomyrtus tomentosus</foreign> being twirled by
means of a cord in a socket let into a thick bough of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Debregeasia
velutina</foreign>. With this holy flame a heap of wood of
two sorts, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Eugenia Jambolana</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Phyllanthus Emblica</foreign>, is
kindled, and the hot embers are spread over a fire-pit about
five yards long and three yards broad. When all is ready,
the priest ties bells on his legs and approaches the fire-pit,
carrying milk freshly drawn from a cow which has calved
for the first time, and also bearing flowers of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rhododendron
arboreum</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Leucas aspera</foreign>, or jasmine. After doing obeisance,
he throws the flowers on the embers and then pours some of
the milk over them. If the omens are propitious, that is, if
the flowers remain for a few seconds unscorched and the milk
does not hiss when it falls on the embers, the priest walks
boldly over the embers and is followed by a crowd of celebrants,
who before they submit to the ordeal count the hairs
on their feet. If any of the hairs are found to be singed
after the passage through the fire-pit, it is an ill omen.
Sometimes the Badagas drive their cattle, which have recovered
from sickness, over the hot embers in performance
of a vow.<note place='foot'>E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Castes and Tribes
of Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1909), i.
98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographic Notes in
Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1906), pp.
476 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Melur, another place of the Badagas in the
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
Neilgherry Hills, three, five, or seven men are chosen to walk
through the fire at the festival; and before they perform the
ceremony they pour into an adjacent stream milk from cows
which have calved for the first time during the year. A
general feast follows the performance of the rite, and next
day the land is ploughed and sown for the first time that
season. At Jakkaneri, another place of the Badagas in the
Neilgherry Hills, the passage through the fire at the festival
<q>seems to have originally had some connection with agricultural
prospects, as a young bull is made to go partly
across the fire-pit before the other devotees, and the owners
of young cows which have had their first calves during the
year take precedence of others in the ceremony, and bring
offerings of milk, which are sprinkled over the burning
embers.</q><note place='foot'>E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Castes and Tribes
of Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1909), i.
100 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> According to another account the ceremony
among the Badagas was performed every second year at a
harvest festival, and the performers were a set of degenerate
Brahmans called Haruvarus, who <q>used to walk on burning
coals with bare feet, pretending that the god they worshipped
could allay the heat and make fire like cold water to them.
As they only remained a few seconds, however, on the coals,
it was impossible that they could receive much injury.</q><note place='foot'>F. Metz, <hi rend='italic'>The Tribes inhabiting
the Neilgherry Hills</hi>, Second Edition
(Mangalore, 1864), p. 55.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The fire-walk
in
Japan.</note>
In Japan the fire-walk is performed as a religious rite
twice a year at a temple in the Kanda quarter of Tokio.
One of the performances takes place in September. It was
witnessed in the year 1903 by the wife of an American naval
officer, who has described it. In a court of the temple a bed
of charcoal about six yards long, two yards wide, and two
feet deep was laid down and covered with a deep layer of
straw. Being ignited, the straw blazed up, and when the
flames had died down the bed of hot charcoal was fanned
by attendants into a red glow. Priests dressed in robes of
white cotton then walked round the fire, striking sparks from
flint and steel and carrying trays full of salt. When mats
had been laid down at the two ends of the fire and salt
poured on them, the priests rubbed their bare feet twice in
the salt and then walked calmly down the middle of the fire.
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
They were followed by a number of people, including some
boys and a woman with a baby in her arms. <q>The Shintoists
claim that, having been perfectly purified by their prayers
and ceremonies, no evil has any power over them. Fire they
regard as the very spirit of evil; so twice a year, I believe,
they go through this fire-walking as a kind of <q>outward and
visible sign of inward spiritual grace.</q></q><note place='foot'><q>A Japanese Fire-walk,</q> <hi rend='italic'>American
Anthropologist</hi>, New Series, v. (1903)
pp. 377-380. The ceremony has been
described to me by two eye-witnesses,
Mr. Ernest Foxwell of St. John's
College, Cambridge, and Miss E. P.
Hughes, formerly Principal of the
Teachers' Training College, Cambridge.
Mr. Foxwell examined the
feet of the performers both before
and after their passage through the
fire and found no hurt. The heat
was so great that the sweat ran down
him as he stood near the bed of glowing
charcoal. He cannot explain the
immunity of the performers. He informs
me that the American writer
Percival Lowell walked in the fire
and was burned so severely that he
was laid up in bed for three weeks;
while on the other hand a Scotch
engineer named Hillhouse passed over
the hot charcoal unscathed. Several
of Miss Hughes's Japanese pupils also
went through the ordeal with impunity,
but one of them burned a toe. Both
before and after walking through the
fire the people dipped their feet in a
white stuff which Miss Hughes was
told was salt. Compare W. G. Aston,
<hi rend='italic'>Shinto</hi> (London, 1905), p. 348: <q>At
the present day plunging the hand into
boiling water, walking barefoot over a
bed of live coals, and climbing a ladder
formed of sword-blades set edge upwards
are practised, not by way of
ordeal, but to excite the awe and
stimulate the piety of the ignorant
spectators.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The fire-walk
in
Fiji,
Tahiti,
the Marquesas
Islands,
and
Trinidad.</note>
In the island of Mbengga, one of the Fijian archipelago,
once every year a dracaena, which grows in profusion on
the grassy hillsides, becomes fit to yield the sugar of which
its fibrous root is full. To render the roots edible it is
necessary to bake them among hot stones for four days. A
great pit is dug and filled with great stones and blazing
logs, and when the flames have died down and the stones
are at white heat, the oven is ready to receive the roots.
At this moment the members of a certain clan called Na
Ivilankata, favoured of the gods, leap into the oven and
walk unharmed upon the hot stones, which would scorch
the feet of any other persons. On one occasion when the
ceremony was witnessed by Europeans fifteen men of the
clan, dressed in garlands and fringes, walked unscathed
through the furnace, where tongues of fire played among
the hot stones. The pit was about nineteen feet wide and
the men marched round it, planting their feet squarely and
firmly on each stone. When they emerged from the pit,
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
the feet of several were examined and shewed no trace
of scorching; even the anklets of dried tree-fern leaves
which they wore on their legs were unburnt. The immunity
thus enjoyed by members of the clan in the fiery furnace is
explained by a legend that in former days a chief of the
clan, named Tui Nkualita, received for himself and his
descendants this remarkable privilege from a certain god,
whom the chief had accidentally dragged out of a deep
pool of water by the hair of his head.<note place='foot'>Basil Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>South Sea Yarns</hi>
(Edinburgh and London, 1894), pp.
195-207. Compare F. Arthur Jackson,
<q>A Fijian Legend of the Origin
of the <foreign rend='italic'>Vilavilairevo</foreign> or Fire Ceremony,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Polynesian
Society</hi>, vol. iii. No. 2 (June, 1894),
pp. 72-75; R. Fulton, <q>An Account
of the Fiji Fire-walking Ceremony,
or <foreign rend='italic'>Vilavilairevo</foreign>, with a probable
explanation of the mystery,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Transactions and Proceedings of the
New Zealand Institute</hi>, xxxv. (1902)
pp. 187-201; Lieutenant Vernon H.
Haggard, in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xiv. (1903) pp.
88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A similar ceremony
of walking through fire, or rather over a furnace
of hot charcoal or hot stones, has also been observed in
Tahiti,<note place='foot'>S. P. Langley, <q>The Fire-walk
Ceremony in Tahiti,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of the
Smithsonian Institution for 1901</hi>
(Washington, 1902), pp. 539-544;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xiv. (1901) pp. 446-452;
<q>More about Fire-walking,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Polynesian Society</hi>, vol.
x. No. 1 (March, 1901), pp. 53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
In his <hi rend='italic'>Modern Mythology</hi> (pp. 162-165)
Andrew Lang quotes from <hi rend='italic'>The
Polynesian Society's Journal</hi>, vol. ii.
No. 2, pp. 105-108, an account of the
fire-walk by Miss Tenira Henry, which
seems to refer to Raiatea, one of the
Tahitian group of islands.</note> the Marquesas Islands,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Annales de l'Association de la
Propagation de la Foi</hi>, lxix. (1897)
pp. 130-133. But in the ceremony
here described the chief performer
was a native of Huahine, one of the
Tahitian group of islands. The wood
burned in the furnace was hibiscus
and native chestnut (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Inocarpus edulis</foreign>).
Before stepping on the hot stones the
principal performer beat the edge of
the furnace twice or thrice with <foreign rend='italic'>ti</foreign>
leaves (dracaena).</note> and by Hindoo coolies in
the West Indian island of Trinidad;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Les Missions Catholiques</hi>, x. (1878)
pp. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Lang, <hi rend='italic'>Modern Mythology</hi>,
p. 167, quoting Mr. Henry R.
St. Clair.</note> but the eye-witnesses
who have described the rite, as it is observed in these islands,
have said little or nothing as to its meaning and purpose,
their whole attention having been apparently concentrated on
the heat of the furnace and the state of the performers' legs
before and after passing through it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hottentot
custom of
driving
their sheep
through
fire and
smoke.</note>
<q>Another grand custom of the Hottentots, which they
likewise term <foreign rend='italic'>andersmaken</foreign>, is the driving their sheep at
certain times through the fire. Early in the day appointed
by a kraal for the observance of this custom, the women
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
milk all their cows, and set the whole produce before their
husbands. 'Tis a strict rule at those times that the women
neither taste, nor suffer their children to touch, a drop of it.
The whole quantity is sacred to the men, who drink it all up
before they address themselves to the business of the fire.
Having consumed the milk, some go and bring the sheep
together to the place where the fire is to be lighted, while
others repair to the place to light it. The fire is made of
chips and dry twigs and thinly spread into a long square.
Upon the coming up of the sheep, the fire, scattered into this
figure, is covered with green twigs to raise a great smoak;
and a number of men range themselves closely on both sides
of it, making a lane for the sheep to pass through, and extending
themselves to a good distance beyond the fire on the
side where the sheep are to enter. Things being in this
posture, the sheep are driven into the lane close up to the
fire, which now smoaks in the thickest clouds. The foremost
boggle, and being forced forward by the press behind, seek
their escape by attempting breaches in the ranks. The men
stand close and firm, and whoop and goad them forward;
when a few hands, planted at the front of the fire, catch three
or four of the foremost sheep by the head, and drag them
through, and bring them round into the sight of the rest;
which sometimes upon this, the whooping and goading
continuing, follow with a tantivy, jumping and pouring
themselves through the fire and smoak with a mighty
clattering and fury. At other times they are not so tractable,
but put the Hottentots to the trouble of dragging
numbers of them through; and sometimes, in a great press
and fright, sturdily attacking the ranks, they make a breach
and escape. This is a very mortifying event at all times,
the Hottentots, upon whatever account, looking upon it as a
heavy disgrace and a very ill omen into the bargain. But
when their labours here are attended with such success, that
the sheep pass readily through or over the fire, 'tis hardly
in the power of language to describe them in all the sallies
of their joy.</q> The writer who thus describes the custom had
great difficulty in extracting an explanation of it from the
Hottentots. At last one of them informed him that their
country was much infested by wild dogs, which made terrible
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
havoc among the cattle, worrying the animals to death even
when they did not devour them. <q>Now we have it,</q> he said,
<q>from our ancestors, that if sheep are driven through the fire,
as we say, that is, through a thick smoak, the wild dogs will
not be fond of attacking them while the scent of the smoak
remains upon their fleeces. We therefore from time to time,
for the security of our flocks, perform this <foreign rend='italic'>andersmaken</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>Peter Kolben, <hi rend='italic'>The Present State
of the Cape of Good Hope</hi>, Second
Edition (London, 1738), i. 129-133.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fire
applied to
sick cattle
by the
Nandi and
Zulus.</note>
When disease breaks out in a herd of the Nandi, a
pastoral tribe of British East Africa, a large bonfire is made
with the wood of a certain tree (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Olea chrysophilla</foreign>), and
brushwood of two sorts of shrubs is thrown on the top.
Then the sick herd is driven to the fire, and while the
animals are standing near it, a sheep big with young is
brought to them and anointed with milk by an elder, after
which it is strangled by two men belonging to clans that
may intermarry. The intestines are then inspected, and if
the omens prove favourable, the meat is roasted and eaten;
moreover rings are made out of the skin and worn by the
cattle-owners. After the meat has been eaten, the herd is
driven round the fire, and milk is poured on each beast.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), pp. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
When their cattle are sick, the Zulus of Natal will collect
their herds in a kraal, where a medicine-man kindles a fire,
burns medicine in it, and so fumigates the cattle with the
medicated smoke. Afterwards he sprinkles the herd with a
decoction, and, taking some melted fat of the dead oxen in
his mouth, squirts it on a fire-brand and holds the brand to
each animal in succession.<note place='foot'>Rev. Joseph Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs
of Natal</hi> (London, 1857), p. 35.</note> Such a custom is probably
equivalent to the Hottentot and European practice of driving
cattle through a fire.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Indians of
Yucatan
walk over
hot embers
in order to
avert
calamities.</note>
Among the Indians of Yucatan the year which was
marked in their calendar by the sign of <foreign rend='italic'>Cauac</foreign> was reputed
to be very unlucky; they thought that in the course of it the
death-rate would be high, the maize crops would be withered
up by the extreme heat of the sun, and what remained of
the harvest would be devoured by swarms of ants and birds.
To avert these calamities they used to erect a great pyre of
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
wood, to which most persons contributed a faggot. Having
danced about it during the day, they set fire to it at night-fall,
and when the flames had died down, they spread out
the red embers and walked or ran barefoot over them, some
of them escaping unsmirched by the flames, but others
burning themselves more or less severely. In this way they
hoped to conjure away the evils that threatened them, and
to undo the sinister omens of the year.<note place='foot'>Diego de Landa, <hi rend='italic'>Relation des
choses de Yucatan</hi> (Paris, 1864), pp.
231, 233.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The fire-walk
in
antiquity,
at Castabala
in
Cappadocia
and
at Mount
Soracte
near Rome.</note>
Similar rites were performed at more than one place
in classical antiquity. At Castabala, in Cappadocia, the
priestesses of an Asiatic goddess, whom the Greeks called
Artemis Perasia, used to walk barefoot through a furnace of
hot charcoal and take no harm.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xii. 2. 7, p. 537. Compare
<hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 89, 134 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Again, at the foot of
Mount Soracte, in Italy, there was a sanctuary of a goddess
Feronia, where once a year the men of certain families
walked barefoot, but unscathed, over the glowing embers
and ashes of a great fire of pinewood in presence of a vast
multitude, who had assembled from all the country round
about to pay their devotions to the deity or to ply their
business at the fair. The families from whom the performers
of the rite were drawn went by the name of Hirpi Sorani,
or <q>Soranian Wolves</q>; and in consideration of the services
which they rendered the state by walking through the fire,
they were exempted, by a special decree of the senate, from
military service and all public burdens. In the discharge of
their sacred function, if we can trust the testimony of Strabo,
they were believed to be inspired by the goddess Feronia.
The ceremony certainly took place in her sanctuary, which
was held in the highest reverence alike by Latins and Sabines;
but according to Virgil and Pliny the rite was performed
in honour of the god of the mountain, whom they call by
the Greek name of Apollo, but whose real name appears
to have been Soranus.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> vii. 19; Virgil,
<hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> xi. 784 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> with the comment
of Servius; Strabo, v. 2. 9, p. 226;
Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Rom.</hi> iii. 32. From a reference to the
custom in Silius Italicus (v. 175 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>)
it seems that the men passed thrice
through the furnace holding the entrails
of the sacrificial victims in their
hands. The learned but sceptical
Varro attributed their immunity in the
fire to a drug with which they took
care to anoint the soles of their feet
before they planted them in the
furnace. See Varro, cited by Servius,
on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> xi. 787. The whole
subject has been treated by W. Mannhardt
(<hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>,
Berlin, 1877, pp. 327 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>), who compares
the rites of these <q>Soranian
Wolves</q> with the ceremonies performed
by the brotherhood of the
Green Wolf at Jumièges in Normandy.
See above, vol. i. pp. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> If Soranus was a sun-god, as his
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
name has by some been thought to indicate,<note place='foot'>L. Preller (<hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
i. 268), following G. Curtius, would
connect the first syllable of Soranus and
Soracte with the Latin <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sol</foreign>, <q>sun.</q>
However, this etymology appears to
be at the best very doubtful. My
friend Prof. J. H. Moulton doubts
whether <foreign rend='italic'>Soranus</foreign> can be connected
with <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sol</foreign>; he tells me that the interchange
of <hi rend='italic'>l</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>r</hi> is rare. He would
rather connect <foreign rend='italic'>Soracte</foreign> with the Greek
ὕραξ, <q>a shrew-mouse.</q> In that case
Apollo Soranus might be the equivalent
of the Greek Apollo Smintheus, <q>the
Mouse Apollo.</q> Professor R. S. Conway
also writes to me (11th November
1902) that <foreign rend='italic'>Soranus</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>Soracte</foreign> <q>have
nothing to do with <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sol</foreign>; <hi rend='italic'>r</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>l</hi> are
not confused in Italic.</q></note> we might perhaps
conclude that the passage of his priests through the fire was
a magical ceremony designed to procure a due supply of
light and warmth for the earth by mimicking the sun's
passage across the firmament. For so priceless a service,
rendered at some personal risk, it would be natural that the
magicians should be handsomely rewarded by a grateful
country, and that they should be released from the common
obligations of earth in order the better to devote themselves
to their celestial mission. The neighbouring towns paid the
first-fruits of their harvest as tribute to the shrine, and
loaded it besides with offerings of gold and silver, of which,
however, it was swept clean by Hannibal when he hung
with his dusky army, like a storm-cloud about to break,
within sight of the sentinels on the walls of Rome.<note place='foot'>Livy, xxvi. 11. About this time
the Carthaginian army encamped only
three miles from Rome, and Hannibal
in person, at the head of two thousand
cavalry, rode close up to the walls and
leisurely reconnoitered them. See
Livy, xxvi. 10; Polybius, ix. 5-7.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The Meaning of the Fire-walk.'/>
<head>§ 2. The Meaning of the Fire-walk.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Little
evidence
to shew
that the
fire-walk
is a sun-charm.</note>
The foregoing customs, observed in many different parts
of the world, present at least a superficial resemblance to the
modern European practices of leaping over fires and driving
cattle through them; and we naturally ask whether it is not
possible to discover a general explanation which will include
them all. We have seen that two general theories have been
proposed to account for the European practices; according
to one theory the customs in question are sun-charms,
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
according to the other they are purifications. Let us see
how the two rival theories fit the other facts which we have
just passed in review. To take the solar theory first, it is
supported, first, by a statement that the fires at the Pongol
festival in Southern India are intended to wake the sun-god
or the fire-god from his sleep;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>.</note> and, second, by the etymology
which connects Soranus, the god of Soracte, with the
sun.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>.</note> But for reasons which have already been given,
neither of these arguments carries much weight; and apart
from them there appears to be nothing in the foregoing
customs to suggest that they are sun-charms. Nay, some
of the customs appear hardly reconcilable with such a view.
For it is to be observed that the fire-walk is frequently
practised in India and other tropical countries, where as a
rule people would more naturally wish to abate than to
increase the fierce heat of the sun. In Yucatan certainly
the intention of kindling the bonfires cannot possibly have
been to fan the solar flames, since one of the principal evils
which the bonfires were designed to remedy was precisely
the excessive heat of the sun, which had withered up the
maize crops.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus the solar theory is not strongly supported
by any of the facts which we are considering, and it
is actually inconsistent with some of them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>On the
other hand
there is
much to
be said for
the view
that the
fire-walk
is a form
of purification,
the
flames
being
thought
either to
burn up
or repel
the powers
of evil. Custom of
stepping
over fire
for the purpose
of
getting rid
of a ghost. Widows
fumigated
to free
them from
their
husbands'
ghosts.</note>
Not so with the purificatory theory. It is obviously
applicable to some of the facts, and apparently consistent
with them all. Thus we have seen that sick men make a
vow to walk over the fire, and that sick cattle are driven
over it. In such cases clearly the intention is to cleanse the
suffering man or beast from the infection of disease, and
thereby to restore him or it to health; and the fire is supposed
to effect this salutary end, either by burning up the powers
of evil or by interposing an insurmountable barrier between
them and the sufferer. For it is to be remembered that
evils which civilized men regard as impersonal are often
conceived by uncivilized man in the personal shape of
witches and wizards, of ghosts and hobgoblins; so that
measures which we should consider as simple disinfectants
the savage looks upon as obstacles opportunely presented to
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
the attacks of demons or other uncanny beings. Now of
all such obstacles fire seems generally to be thought the
most effective; hence in passing through or leaping over it
our primitive philosopher often imagines that he is not so
much annihilating his spiritual foe as merely giving him the
slip; the ghostly pursuer shrinks back appalled at the flames
through which his intended victim, driven to desperation by
his fears, has safely passed before him. This interpretation
of the ceremony is confirmed, first, by the observation that
in India the ashes of the bonfire are used as a talisman against
devils and demons;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, compare p. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>.</note> and, second, by the employment of
the ceremony for the avowed purpose of escaping from
the pursuit of a troublesome ghost. For example, in
China <q>they believe that a beheaded man wanders about a
headless spectre in the World of Shades. Such spectres are
frequently to be seen in walled towns, especially in the
neighbourhood of places of execution. Here they often
visit the people with disease and disaster, causing a considerable
depreciation in the value of the houses around such
scenes. Whenever an execution takes place, the people fire
crackers to frighten the headless ghost away from the spot;
and the mandarin who has superintended the bloody work,
on entering the gate of his mansion, has himself carried in
his sedan chair over a fire lighted on the pavement, lest the
headless apparition should enter there along with him; for
disembodied spirits are afraid of fire.</q><note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, i. (Leyden, 1892),
p. 355; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> vi. (Leyden, 1910) p.
942.</note> For a like reason
Chinese mourners after a funeral, and persons who have paid
a visit of condolence to a house of death, often purify themselves
by stepping over a fire of straw;<note place='foot'>Rev. J. H. Gray, <hi rend='italic'>China</hi> (London,
1878), i. 287, 305; J. J. M. de Groot,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 32, vi. 942.</note> the purification, we
cannot doubt, consists simply in shaking off the ghost who
is supposed to dog their steps. Similarly at a coroner's
inquest in China the mandarin and his subordinates hold
pocket handkerchiefs or towels to their mouths and noses
while they are inspecting the corpse, no doubt to hinder the
ghost from insinuating himself into their bodies by these
apertures; and when they have discharged their dangerous
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
duty, they purify themselves by passing through a small fire
of straw kindled on the pavement before they enter their
sedan-chairs to return home, while at the same time the
crowd of idlers, who have gathered about the door, assist in
keeping the ghost at bay by a liberal discharge of crackers.
The same double process of purification, or rather of repelling
the ghost, by means of fire and crackers is repeated at the gate
of the mandarin's residence when the procession defiles into
it.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 137,
vi. 942.</note> Among some of the Tartars it used to be customary
for all persons returning from a burial to leap over a fire
made for the purpose, <q>in order that the dead man might
not follow them; for apparently in their opinion he would
be afraid of the fire.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. Gmelin, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch Sibirien</hi>
(Göttingen, 1751-1752), i. 333.</note> <q>The Yakuts bury their dead as a
rule on the day of the death, and in order not to take the
demon of death home with them, they kindle fires on the
way back from the burial and jump over them in the belief
that the demon of death, who dreads fire, will not follow
them, and that in this way they will be freed from the
persecutions of the hated demon of death.</q><note place='foot'>W. L. Priklonski, <q>Ueber das
Schamenthum bei den Jakuten,</q> in A.
Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus Volks- und Menschenkunde</hi>
(Berlin, 1888), i. 219.
Compare Vasilij Priklonski, <q>Todtengebräuche
der Jakuten,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lix.
(1891) p. 85.</note> In Sikkhim,
when members of the Khambu caste have buried a corpse,
all persons present at the burial <q>adjourn to a stream
for a bath of purification, and, on re-entering the house,
have to tread on a bit of burning cloth, to prevent the
evil spirits who attend at funerals from following them in.</q><note place='foot'>J. A. H. Louis, <hi rend='italic'>The Gates of
Thibet</hi> (Calcutta, 1894), p. 116.</note>
Among the Fans of West Africa, <q>when the mourning
is over, the wives of the deceased must pass over a small
lighted brazier in the middle of the village, then they sit
down while some leaves are still burning under their feet;
their heads are shaved, and from that moment they are
purified from the mourning&mdash;perhaps we should translate:
<q>delivered from the ghost of their husband</q>&mdash;and may be
divided among the heirs.</q><note place='foot'>E. Allegret, <q>Les Idées religieuses
des Fañ (Afrique Occidentale),</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue de l'Histoire des Religions</hi>, l.
(1904) p. 220.</note> At Agweh, on the Slave Coast
of West Africa, a widow used to remain shut up for six
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
months in the room where her husband was buried; at the
end of the time a fire was lighted on the floor, and red
peppers strewn in it, until in the pungent fumes the widow
was nearly stifled.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast of West
Africa</hi> (London, 1890), p. 160.</note> No doubt the intention was to rid her
of her husband's ghost in order that she might mingle again
in the world with safety to herself and others.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence it
seems
probable
that the
chief use
of the fire
in the fire-festivals
of
Europe
was to
destroy or
repel the
witches, to
whose
maleficent
arts the
people
ascribed
most of
their
troubles.</note>
On the analogy of these customs, in which the purpose
of the passage through the fire appears to be unmistakable,
we may suppose that the motive of the rite is similar at the
popular festivals of Europe and the like observances in
other lands. In every case the ritual appears to be explained
in a simple and natural way by the supposition that the
performers believe themselves to be freed from certain evils,
actual or threatened, through the beneficent agency of fire,
which either burns up and destroys the noxious things or
at all events repels and keeps them at bay. Indeed this
belief, or at least this hope, is definitely expressed by
some of the people who leap across the bonfires: they
imagine that all ills are burnt up and consumed in the
flames, or that they leave their sins, or at all events their
fleas, behind them on the far side of the fire.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. 162, 163, 211, 212,
214, 215, 217.</note> But we may
conjecture that originally all the evils from which the people
thus thought to deliver themselves were conceived by them
to be caused by personal beings, such as ghosts and demons
or witches and warlocks, and that the fires were kindled
for the sole purpose of burning or banning these noxious
creatures. Of these evil powers witches and warlocks
appear to have been the most dreaded by our European
peasantry; and it is therefore significant that the fires kindled
on these occasions are often expressly alleged to burn the
witches,<note place='foot'>See the references above, vol. i.
p. 342 note 2.</note> that effigies of witches are not uncommonly consumed
in them,<note place='foot'>See the references above, vol. i.
p. 342 note 3.</note> and that two of the great periodic fire-festivals
of the year, namely May Day and Midsummer Eve,
coincide with the seasons when witches are believed to be
most active and mischievous, and when accordingly many
other precautions are taken against them.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 127; <hi rend='italic'>The
Scapegoat</hi>, pp. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare
R. Kühnau, <hi rend='italic'>Schlesische Sagen</hi> (Berlin,
1910-1913), iii. p. 69, No. 1428:
<q>In the county of Glatz the people
believe that on Walpurgis Night
(the Eve of May Day) the witches
under cover of the darkness seek to
harm men in all sorts of ways. To
guard themselves against them the
people set small birch trees in front
of the house-door on the previous day,
and are of opinion that the witches
must count all the leaves on these
little trees before they can get into
the house. While they are still at
this laborious task, the day dawns and
the dreaded guests must retire to their
own realm</q>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, iii. p. 39, No. 1394:
<q>On St. John's Night (between the
23rd and 24th of June) the witches again
busily bestir themselves to force their
way into the houses of men and the
stalls of cattle. People stick small
twigs of oak in the windows and doors
of the houses and cattle-stalls to keep
out the witches. This is done in the
neighbourhood of Patschkau and generally
in the districts of Frankenstein,
Münsterberg, Grottkau, and Neisse. In
the same regions they hang garlands,
composed of oak leaves intertwined with
flowers, at the windows. The garland
must be woven in the house itself and
may not be carried over any threshold;
it must be hung out of the window
on a nail, which is inserted there.</q>
Similar evidence might be multiplied
almost indefinitely.</note> Thus if witchcraft,
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
as a great part of mankind has believed, is the fertile
source of almost all the calamities that afflict our species, and
if the surest means of frustrating witchcraft is fire, then it
follows as clearly as day follows night that to jump over a
fire must be a sovereign panacea for practically all the ills that
flesh is heir to. We can now, perhaps, fully understand why
festivals of fire played so prominent a part in the religion
or superstition of our heathen forefathers; the observance of
such festivals flowed directly from their overmastering fear
of witchcraft and from their theory as to the best way of
combating that dreadful evil.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. The Burning of Human Beings in the Fires.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Burning of Effigies in the Fires.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Burning of Effigies in the Fires.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The effigies
burnt in
the fires
probably
represent
witches.</note>
We have still to ask, What is the meaning of burning
effigies in the fire at these festivals? After the preceding
investigation the answer to the question seems obvious. As
the fires are often alleged to be kindled for the purpose of
burning the witches, and as the effigy burnt in them is
sometimes called <q>the Witch,</q> we might naturally be disposed
to conclude that all the effigies consumed in the flames
on these occasions represent witches or warlocks, and that
the custom of burning them is merely a substitute for burning
the wicked men and women themselves, since on the
principle of homoeopathic or imitative magic you practically
destroy the witch herself in destroying her effigy. On the
whole this explanation of the burning of straw figures in
human shape at the festivals appears to be the most
probable.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Possibly
some of
the effigies
burnt in
the fires
represent
tree-spirits
or spirits of
vegetation.</note>
Yet it may be that this explanation does not apply to
all the cases, and that certain of them may admit and even
require another interpretation, in favour of which I formerly
argued as follows:&mdash;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Golden Bough</hi>, Second Edition (London, 1900), ii. 314-316.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>It remains to ask, What is the meaning of burning an
effigy in these bonfires? The effigies so burned, as I have
already remarked, can hardly be separated from the effigies
of Death which are burned or otherwise destroyed in spring;
and grounds have been already given for regarding the so-called
effigies of Death as really representatives of the tree-spirit
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
or spirit of vegetation.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 249 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Are the other effigies, which
are burned in the spring and midsummer bonfires, susceptible
of the same explanation? It would seem so. For just as
the fragments of the so-called Death are stuck in the fields
to make the crops grow, so the charred embers of the figure
burned in the spring bonfires are sometimes laid on the
fields in the belief that they will keep vermin from the crop.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 117, compare
pp. 143, 144.</note>
Again, the rule that the last married bride must leap over
the fire in which the straw-man is burned on Shrove Tuesday,
is probably intended to make her fruitful.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. p. 120.</note> But, as we have
seen, the power of blessing women with offspring is a special
attribute of tree-spirits;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> it is therefore a fair presumption
that the burning effigy over which the bride must leap is a
representative of the fertilizing tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation.
This character of the effigy, as representative of the
spirit of vegetation, is almost unmistakable when the figure is
composed of an unthreshed sheaf of corn or is covered from
head to foot with flowers.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 120, 167.</note> Again, it is to be noted that,
instead of a puppet, trees, either living or felled, are sometimes
burned both in the spring and midsummer bonfires.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 116,
142, 173 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 185, 191, 192, 193, 209.</note>
Now, considering the frequency with which the tree-spirit is
represented in human shape, it is hardly rash to suppose that
when sometimes a tree and sometimes an effigy is burned in
these fires, the effigy and the tree are regarded as equivalent
to each other, each being a representative of the tree-spirit.
This, again, is confirmed by observing, first, that sometimes the
effigy which is to be burned is carried about simultaneously
with a May-tree, the former being carried by the boys, the
latter by the girls;<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 120.</note> and, second, that the effigy is sometimes
tied to a living tree and burned with it.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 116. But the
effigy is called the Witch.</note> In these cases, we
can scarcely doubt, the tree-spirit is represented, as we have
found it represented before, in duplicate, both by the tree and
by the effigy. That the true character of the effigy as a
representative of the beneficent spirit of vegetation should
sometimes be forgotten, is natural. The custom of burning
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
a beneficent god is too foreign to later modes of thought to
escape misinterpretation. Naturally enough the people who
continued to burn his image came in time to identify it as
the effigy of persons, whom, on various grounds, they regarded
with aversion, such as Judas Iscariot, Luther, and a witch.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reasons
for burning
effigies of
the spirit of
vegetation
or for
passing
them
through
the fire.</note>
<q>The general reasons for killing a god or his representative
have been examined in the preceding chapter.<note place='foot'>The chapter has since been expanded
into the four volumes of <hi rend='italic'>The
Dying God</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of
the Wild</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>The Scapegoat</hi>.</note>
But when the god happens to be a deity of vegetation,
there are special reasons why he should die by fire. For
light and heat are necessary to vegetable growth; and, on
the principle of sympathetic magic, by subjecting the
personal representative of vegetation to their influence,
you secure a supply of these necessaries for trees and crops.
In other words, by burning the spirit of vegetation in a fire
which represents the sun, you make sure that, for a time
at least, vegetation shall have plenty of sun. It may be
objected that, if the intention is simply to secure enough
sunshine for vegetation, this end would be better attained, on
the principles of sympathetic magic, by merely passing the
representative of vegetation through the fire instead of
burning him. In point of fact this is sometimes done. In
Russia, as we have seen, the straw figure of Kupalo is not
burned in the midsummer fire, but merely carried backwards
and forwards across it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 262.</note> But, for the reasons already given,
it is necessary that the god should die; so next day Kupalo
is stripped of her ornaments and thrown into a stream. In
this Russian custom, therefore, the passage of the image
through the fire is a sun-charm pure and simple; the killing
of the god is a separate act, and the mode of killing him&mdash;by
drowning&mdash;is probably a rain-charm. But usually people
have not thought it necessary to draw this fine distinction;
for the various reasons already assigned, it is advantageous,
they think, to expose the god of vegetation to a considerable
degree of heat, and it is also advantageous to kill him, and
they combine these advantages in a rough-and-ready way by
burning him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
custom of
passing
images of
gods or
their living
representatives
through
the fires
may be
simply a
form of
purification.</note>
On the foregoing argument, which I do not now find very
cogent, I would remark that we must distinguish the cases in
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
which an effigy or an image is burnt in the fire from the
cases in which it is simply carried through or over it. We
have seen that in the Chinese festival of fire the image of the
god is carried thrice by bearers over the glowing furnace.
Here the motive for subjecting a god to the heat of the
furnace must surely be the same as the motive for subjecting
his worshippers to the same ordeal; and if the motive
in the case of the worshippers is purificatory, it is probably
the same in the case of the deity. In other words we may
suppose that the image of a god is periodically carried
over a furnace in order to purify him from the taint of
corruption, the spells of magicians, or any other evil influences
that might impair or impede his divine energies.
The same theory would explain the custom of obliging the
priest ceremonially to pass through the fire; the custom
need not be a mitigation of an older practice of burning
him in the flames, it may only be a purification designed to
enable him the better to discharge his sacred duties as
representative of the deity in the coming year. Similarly,
when the rite is obligatory, not on the people as a whole,
but only on certain persons chosen for the purpose,<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</note> we may
suppose that these persons act as representatives of the
entire community, which thus passes through the fire by
deputy and consequently participates in all the benefits
which are believed to accrue from the purificatory character
of the rite.<note place='foot'>Among the Klings of Southern
India the ceremony of walking over a
bed of red-hot ashes is performed by a
few chosen individuals, who are prepared
for the rite by a devil-doctor or
medicine-man. The eye-witness who
describes the ceremony adds: <q>As I
understood it, they took on themselves
and expiated the sins of the Kling
community for the past year.</q> See
the letter of Stephen Ponder, quoted
by Andrew Lang, <hi rend='italic'>Modern Mythology</hi>
(London, 1897), p. 160.</note> In both cases, therefore, if my interpretation of
them is correct, the passage over or through a fire is not a
substitute for human sacrifice; it is nothing but a stringent
form of purification.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The Burning of Men and Animals in the Fires.'/>
<head>§ 2. The Burning of Men and Animals in the Fires.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Yet at some
of the fire-festivals
the
pretence of
burning
live persons
in the fires
points to a
former
custom of
human
sacrifice.</note>
Yet in the popular customs connected with the fire-festivals
of Europe there are certain features which appear to
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
point to a former practice of human sacrifice. We have
seen reasons for believing that in Europe living persons
have often acted as representatives of the tree-spirit and
corn-spirit and have suffered death as such.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 205 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>, i.
216 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> There is no
reason, therefore, why they should not have been burned, if
any special advantages were likely to be attained by putting
them to death in that way. The consideration of human suffering
is not one which enters into the calculations of primitive
man. Now, in the fire-festivals which we are discussing, the
pretence of burning people is sometimes carried so far that it
seems reasonable to regard it as a mitigated survival of an
older custom of actually burning them. Thus in Aachen, as
we saw, the man clad in peas-straw acts so cleverly that the
children really believe he is being burned.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 120.</note> At Jumièges in
Normandy the man clad all in green, who bore the title of
the Green Wolf, was pursued by his comrades, and when
they caught him they feigned to fling him upon the mid-summer
bonfire.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 186.</note> Similarly at the Beltane fires in Scotland
the pretended victim was seized, and a show made of throwing
him into the flames, and for some time afterwards
people affected to speak of him as dead.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 148.</note> Again, in the
Hallowe'en bonfires of north-eastern Scotland we may
perhaps detect a similar pretence in the custom observed by
a lad of lying down as close to the fire as possible and
allowing the other lads to leap over him.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 233.</note> The titular king
at Aix, who reigned for a year and danced the first dance
round the midsummer bonfire,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 194.</note> may perhaps in days of old
have discharged the less agreeable duty of serving as fuel
for that fire which in later times he only kindled. In the
following customs Mannhardt is probably right in recognizing
traces of an old custom of burning a leaf-clad representative
of the spirit of vegetation. At Wolfeck, in Austria, on Midsummer
Day, a boy completely clad in green fir branches
goes from house to house, accompanied by a noisy crew,
collecting wood for the bonfire. As he gets the wood he
sings&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Forest trees I want,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>No sour milk for me,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>But beer and wine,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>So can the wood-man be jolly and gay.</hi></q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
524.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In some parts of Bavaria, also, the boys who go from house
to house collecting fuel for the midsummer bonfire envelop
one of their number from head to foot in green branches of
firs, and lead him by a rope through the whole village.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde
des Königreichs Bayern</hi> (Munich, 1860-1867),
iii. 956; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 524. In the neighbourhood
of Breitenbrunn the lad who
collects fuel at this season has his face
blackened and is called <q>the Charcoal
Man</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Bavaria</hi>, etc., ii. 261).</note> At
Moosheim, in Wurtemberg, the festival of St. John's Fire
usually lasted for fourteen days, ending on the second
Sunday after Midsummer Day. On this last day the bonfire
was left in charge of the children, while the older people
retired to a wood. Here they encased a young fellow in
leaves and twigs, who, thus disguised, went to the fire,
scattered it, and trod it out. All the people present fled at
the sight of him.<note place='foot'>A. Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi> (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1861-1862),
ii. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 146; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp. 524 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In pagan
Europe the
water as
well as the
fire seems
to have
claimed
its human
victim on
Midsummer
Day. Custom of
throwing a
man and a
tree into
the water
on St.
John's Day.</note>
In this connexion it is worth while to note that in pagan
Europe the water as well as the fire seems to have claimed
its human victim on Midsummer Day. Some German rivers,
such as the Saale and the Spree, are believed still to require
their victim on that day; hence people are careful not to bathe
at this perilous season. Where the beautiful Neckar flows,
between vine-clad and wooded hills, under the majestic ruins
of Heidelberg castle, the spirit of the river seeks to drown
three persons, one on Midsummer Eve, one on Midsummer
Day, and one on the day after. On these nights, if you hear
a shriek as of a drowning man or woman from the water,
beware of running to the rescue; for it is only the water-fairy
shrieking to lure you to your doom. Many a fisherman
of the Elbe knows better than to launch his boat and trust
himself to the treacherous river on Midsummer Day. And
Samland fishermen will not go to sea at this season, because
they are aware that the sea is then hollow and demands
a victim. In the neighbourhood of the Lake of Constance
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
the Swabian peasants say that on St. John's Day the Angel
or St. John must have a swimmer and a climber; hence no
one will climb a tree or bathe even in a brook on that day.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart,
1852), pp. 428 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, §§ 120, 122;
O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Das festliche Jahr</hi> (Leipsic, 1863), p.
194; J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch,
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte
Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande</hi> (Leipsic,
1867), p. 176; J. V. Grohmann,
<hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen
und Mähren</hi> (Prague and Leipsic,
1864), p. 49, § 311; W. J. A. Tettau
und J. D. H. Temme, <hi rend='italic'>Die Volkssagen
Ost-preussens, Litthauens und West-preussens</hi>
(Berlin, 1837), pp. 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
K. Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch der Lausitz</hi>
(Leipsic, 1862-1863), i. 48; R. Eisel,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch des Voigtlandes</hi> (Gera, 1871),
p. 31, Nr. 62.</note>
According to others, St. John will have three dead men on
his day; one of them must die by water, one by a fall, and
one by lightning; therefore old-fashioned people warn their
children not to climb or bathe, and are very careful themselves
not to run into any kind of danger on Midsummer
Day.<note place='foot'>Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfeste,
Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</hi>
(Iserlohn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 34.</note> So in some parts of Switzerland people are warned
against bathing on St. John's Night, because the saint's day
demands its victims. Thus in the Emmenthal they say,
<q>This day will have three persons; one must perish in the
air, one in the fire, and the third in the water.</q> At Schaffhausen
the saying runs, <q>St. John the Baptist must have a
runner, must have a swimmer, must have a climber.</q> That
is the reason why you should not climb cherry-trees on the
saint's day, lest you should fall down and break your valuable
neck.<note place='foot'>E. Hoffmann-Krayer, <hi rend='italic'>Feste und
Bräuche des Schweizervolkes</hi> (Zurich,
1913), p. 163.</note> In Cologne the saint is more exacting; on his day
he requires no less than fourteen dead men; seven of them
must be swimmers and seven climbers.<note place='foot'>E. H. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Badisches Volksleben</hi>
(Strasburg, 1900), p. 507.</note> Accordingly when
we find that, in one of the districts where a belief of this
sort prevails, it used to be customary to throw a person into
the water on Midsummer Day, we can hardly help concluding
that this was only a modification of an older custom of
actually drowning a human being in the river at that time.
In Voigtland it was formerly the practice to set up a fine
May tree, adorned with all kinds of things, on St. John's
Day. The people danced round it, and when the lads had
fetched down the things with which it was tricked out,
the tree was thrown into the water. But before this was
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
done, they sought out somebody whom they treated in the
same manner, and the victim of this horseplay was called
<q>the John.</q> The brawls and disorders, which such a custom
naturally provoked, led to the suppression of the whole
ceremony.<note place='foot'>J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>loc. cit.</hi> Tacitus
tells us that the image of the goddess
Nerthus, her vestments, and chariot
were washed in a certain lake, and
that immediately afterwards the slaves
who ministered to the goddess were
swallowed by the lake (<hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, 40).
The statement may perhaps be understood
to mean that the slaves were
drowned as a sacrifice to the deity.
Certainly we know from Tacitus
(<hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, 9 and 39) that the ancient
Germans offered human sacrifices.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Loaves and
flowers
thrown
into the
water on
St. John's
Day, perhaps
as
substitutes
for human
beings.</note>
At Rotenburg on the Neckar they throw a loaf of
bread into the water on St. John's Day; were this offering
not made, the river would grow angry and take away a man.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart,
1852), p. 429, § 121.</note>
Clearly, therefore, the loaf is regarded as a substitute which
the spirit of the river consents to accept instead of a human
victim. Elsewhere the water-sprite is content with flowers.
Thus in Bohemia people sometimes cast garlands into water
on Midsummer Eve; and if the water-sprite pulls one of
them down, it is a sign that the person who threw the
garland in will die.<note place='foot'>O. Frh. von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi> (Prague,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 311.</note> In the villages of Hesse the girl who
first comes to the well early on the morning of Midsummer
Day, places on the mouth of the well a gay garland composed
of many sorts of flowers which she has culled from
the fields and meadows. Sometimes a number of such
garlands are twined together to form a crown, with which
the well is decked. At Fulda, in addition to the flowery
decoration of the wells, the neighbours choose a Lord of
the Wells and announce his election by sending him a great
nosegay of flowers; his house, too, is decorated with green
boughs, and children walk in procession to it. He goes
from house to house collecting materials for a feast, of
which the neighbours partake on the following Sunday.<note place='foot'>Karl Lynker, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen und
Sitten in hessischen Gauen</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Cassel
and Göttingen, 1860), pp. 253, 254,
§§ 335, 336.</note>
What the other duties of the Lord of the Wells may be, we
are not told. We may conjecture that in old days he had
to see to it that the spirits of the water received their dues
from men and maidens on that important day.
</p>

<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Midsummer
Day
deemed
unlucky
and
dangerous.</note>
The belief that the spirits of the water exact a human
life on Midsummer Day may partly explain why that
day is regarded by some people as unlucky. At Neuburg,
in Baden, people who meet on Midsummer Day
bid each other beware.<note place='foot'>E. H. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Badisches Volksleben</hi>
(Strasburg, 1900), p. 506.</note> Sicilian mothers on that ominous
day warn their little sons not to go out of the house,
or, if they do go out, not to stray far, not to walk on
solitary unfrequented paths, to avoid horses and carriages
and persons with firearms, and not to dare to swim; in
short they bid them be on their guard at every turn. The
Sicilian writer who tells us this adds: <q>This I know and
sadly remember ever since the year 1848, when, not yet
seven years old, I beheld in the dusk of the evening on St.
John's Day some women of my acquaintance bringing back
in their arms my little brother, who had gone to play in a
garden near our house, and there had found his death, my
poor Francesco! In their simplicity the women who strove
to console my inconsolable mother, driven distracted by the
dreadful blow, kept repeating that St. John must have his
due, that on that day he must be appeased. <q>Who knows,</q>
said they, <q>how many other mothers are weeping now for
other little sons forlorn!</q></q><note place='foot'>Giuseppe Pitrè, <hi rend='italic'>Spettacoli e Feste
Popolari Siciliane</hi> (Palermo, 1881), p.
313.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In Europe
people
used to
bathe on
Midsummer
Eve or
Midsummer
Day,
because
water was
thought to
acquire
wonderful
medicinal
virtues at
that time.</note>
Yet curiously enough, though the water-spirits call for
human victims on Midsummer Eve or Midsummer Day,
water in general is supposed at that season to acquire
certain wonderful medicinal virtues, so that he who bathes
in it then or drinks of it is not only healed of all his infirmities
but will be well and hearty throughout the year.
Hence in many parts of Europe, from Sweden in the north
to Sicily in the south, and from Ireland and Spain in the
west to Esthonia in the east it used to be customary for
men, women, and children to bathe in crowds in rivers, the
sea, or springs on Midsummer Eve or Midsummer Day,
hoping thus to fortify themselves for the next twelve months.
The usual time for taking the bath was the night which
intervenes between Midsummer Eve and Midsummer Day;<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
i. 489 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, iii. 487; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der
deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin,
1869), p. 77 § 92; O. Freiherr von
Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Das festliche
Jahr</hi> (Leipsic, 1863), p. 193; F. J.
Vonbun, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>
(Chur, 1862), p. 133; P. Drechsler,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in
Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 143
§ 161; Karl Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch der
Lausitz</hi> (Leipsic, 1862-1863), i. 248,
No. 303; F. J. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem
inneren und äusseren Leben der Ehsten</hi>
(St. Petersburg, 1876), p. 415; L.
Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi> (London,
1870), pp. 261 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Paul Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Le
Folk-lore de France</hi> (Paris, 1904-1907),
ii. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; T. F. Thiselton Dyer,
<hi rend='italic'>British Popular Customs</hi> (London,
1876), pp. 322 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 329 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For more
evidence, see above, vol. i. pp. 193, 194,
205 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 208, 210, 216; <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis,
Osiris</hi>, Second Edition, pp. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
but in Belgium the hour was noon on Midsummer Day.
It was a curious sight, we are told, to see the banks of
a river lined with naked children waiting for the first
stroke of noon to plunge into the healing water. The dip
was supposed to have a remarkable effect in strengthening
the legs. People who were ashamed to bathe in public
used to have cans of water brought to their houses from the
river at midday, and then performed their ablutions in the
privacy of their chambers. Nor did they throw away the
precious fluid; on the contrary they bottled it up and kept
it as a sort of elixir for use throughout the year. It was
thought never to grow foul and to be as blessed as holy water
fetched from a church, which we may well believe. Hence
it served to guard the house against a thunder-storm; when
the clouds were heavy and threatening, all you had to do
was to take the palm branches (that is, the twigs of box-wood)
which were blessed on Palm Sunday, dip them in
the midsummer water, and burn them. That averted the
tempest.<note place='foot'>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Calendrier Belge</hi> (Brussels, 1861-1862),
i. 420 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Monseur, <hi rend='italic'>Le
Folklore Wallon</hi> (Brussels, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p.
130; P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore de
France</hi>, ii. 374 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Swiss canton of Lucerne a bath on Midsummer
Eve is thought to be especially wholesome, though
in other parts of Switzerland, as we saw, bathing at that
season is accounted dangerous.<note place='foot'>E. Hoffmann-Krayer, <hi rend='italic'>Feste und
Bräuche des Schweizervolkes</hi> (Zurich,
1913), p. 163. See above, p. 27.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
customs
and beliefs
as to water
at Midsummer
in
Morocco.</note>
Nor are such customs and beliefs confined to the
Christian peoples of Europe; they are shared also by the
Mohammedan peoples of Morocco. There, too, on Midsummer
Day all water is thought to be endowed with such
marvellous virtue that it not only heals but prevents sickness
for the rest of the year; hence men, women, and
children bathe in the sea, in rivers, or in their houses at
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
that time for the sake of their health. In Fez and other places
on this day people pour or squirt water over each other in the
streets or from the house-tops, so that the streets become
almost as muddy as after a fall of rain. More than that, in
the Andjra they bathe their animals also; horses, mules,
donkeys, cattle, sheep, and goats, all must participate in the
miraculous benefits of midsummer water.<note place='foot'>E. Westermarck, <q>Midsummer
Customs in Morocco,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xvi.
(1905) pp. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ceremonies and
Beliefs connected with Agriculture,
certain Dates of the Solar Year, and
the Weather in Morocco</hi> (Helsingfors,
1913), pp. 84-86; E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie
et Religion dans l'Afrique du Nord</hi>
(Algiers, 1908), pp. 567 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> See also
above, vol. i. p. 216.</note> The rite forms
part of that old heathen celebration of Midsummer which
appears to have been common to the peoples on both sides
of the Mediterranean;<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 213-219.</note> and as the aim of bathing in the
midsummer water is undoubtedly purification, it is reasonable
to assign the same motive for the custom of leaping over
the midsummer bonfire. On the other hand some people in
Morocco, like some people in Europe, think that water on
Midsummer Day is unclean or dangerous. A Berber told
Dr. Westermarck that water is haunted on Midsummer
Day, and that people therefore avoid bathing in it and keep
animals from drinking of it. And among the Beni Ahsen
persons who swim in the river on that day are careful, before
plunging into the water, to throw burning straw into it as an
offering, in order that the spirits may not harm them.<note place='foot'>E. Westermarck, <hi rend='italic'>Ceremonies and
Beliefs connected with Agriculture,
certain Dates of the Solar Year, and
the Weather in Morocco</hi> (Helsingfors,
1913), pp. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
parallelism between the rites of water and fire at this season
is certainly in favour of interpreting both in the same way;<note place='foot'>This has been rightly pointed out
by Dr. Edward Westermarck (<q>Midsummer
Customs in Morocco,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
xvi. (1905) p. 46).</note>
and the traces of human sacrifice which we have detected in
the rite of water may therefore be allowed to strengthen the
inference of a similar sacrifice in the rite of fire.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
sacrifices
by fire
among the
ancient
Gauls. Men and
animals
enclosed
in great wicker-work
images
and burnt
alive.</note>
But it seems possible to go farther than this. Of human
sacrifices offered on these occasions the most unequivocal
traces, as we have seen, are those which, about a hundred
years ago, still lingered at the Beltane fires in the Highlands
of Scotland, that is, among a Celtic people who,
situated in a remote corner of Europe and almost completely
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
isolated from foreign influence, had till then
conserved their old heathenism better perhaps than any
other people in the West of Europe. It is significant, therefore,
that human sacrifices by fire are known, on unquestionable
evidence, to have been systematically practised by the
Celts. The earliest description of these sacrifices has been
bequeathed to us by Julius Caesar. As conqueror of the
hitherto independent Celts of Gaul, Caesar had ample
opportunity of observing the national Celtic religion and
manners, while these were still fresh and crisp from the
native mint and had not yet been fused in the melting-pot
of Roman civilization. With his own notes Caesar appears
to have incorporated the observations of a Greek explorer, by
name Posidonius, who travelled in Gaul about fifty years
before Caesar carried the Roman arms to the English
Channel. The Greek geographer Strabo and the historian
Diodorus seem also to have derived their descriptions of
the Celtic sacrifices from the work of Posidonius, but independently
of each other, and of Caesar, for each of the
three derivative accounts contain some details which are not
to be found in either of the others. By combining them,
therefore, we can restore the original account of Posidonius
with some probability, and thus obtain a picture of the
sacrifices offered by the Celts of Gaul at the close of the
second century before our era.<note place='foot'>Caesar, <hi rend='italic'>Bell. Gall.</hi> vi. 15; Strabo,
iv. 4. 5, p. 198; Diodorus Siculus, v.
32. See W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>,
pp. 525 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The following seem to have
been the main outlines of the custom. Condemned criminals
were reserved by the Celts in order to be sacrificed to the gods
at a great festival which took place once in every five years.
The more there were of such victims, the greater was believed
to be the fertility of the land.<note place='foot'>Strabo, iv. 4. 4, p. 197: τὰς δὲ
φονικὰς δίκας μάλιστα τούτοις [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the
Druids] ἐπετέτραπτο δικάζειν, ὅταν τε
φορὰ τούτων ᾖ, φορὰν καὶ τῆς χώρας νομίζουσιν
ὑπάρχειν. On this passage see
W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp. 529
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; and below, pp. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> If there were not enough
criminals to furnish victims, captives taken in war were
immolated to supply the deficiency. When the time came the
victims were sacrificed by the Druids or priests. Some they
shot down with arrows, some they impaled, and some they
burned alive in the following manner. Colossal images of
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
wicker-work or of wood and grass were constructed; these
were filled with live men, cattle, and animals of other kinds;
fire was then applied to the images, and they were burned
with their living contents.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>As the
fertility
of the land
was supposed
to
depend on
these
sacrifices,
Mannhardt
interpreted
the victims
as representatives
of tree-spirits
or
spirits of
vegetation.</note>
Such were the great festivals held once every five years.
But besides these quinquennial festivals, celebrated on so
grand a scale, and with, apparently, so large an expenditure
of human life, it seems reasonable to suppose that festivals
of the same sort, only on a lesser scale, were held annually,
and that from these annual festivals are lineally descended
some at least of the fire-festivals which, with their traces of
human sacrifices, are still celebrated year by year in many
parts of Europe. The gigantic images constructed of osiers
or covered with grass in which the Druids enclosed their
victims remind us of the leafy framework in which the human
representative of the tree-spirit is still so often encased.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Hence, seeing that the fertility of the land was apparently
supposed to depend upon the due performance of these
sacrifices, Mannhardt interpreted the Celtic victims, cased in
osiers and grass, as representatives of the tree-spirit or
spirit of vegetation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wicker-work
giants at
popular
festivals
in modern
Europe.
The giant
at Douay
on July the
seventh. The giants
at Dunkirk
on Midsummer
Day.</note>
These wicker giants of the Druids seem to have had
till lately their representatives at the spring and midsummer
festivals of modern Europe. At Douay, down
to the early part of the nineteenth century, a procession
took place annually on the Sunday nearest to the seventh
of July. The great feature of the procession was a
colossal figure, some twenty or thirty feet high, made of
osiers, and called <q>the giant,</q> which was moved through
the streets by means of rollers and ropes worked by
men who were enclosed within the effigy. The wooden
head of the giant is said to have been carved and
painted by Rubens. The figure was armed as a knight
with lance and sword, helmet and shield. Behind him
marched his wife and his three children, all constructed of
osiers on the same principle, but on a smaller scale.<note place='foot'>Madame Clément, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des
fêtes civiles et religieuses du département
du Nord</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Cambrai, 1836), pp.
193-200; A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes
et Traditions des Provinces de France</hi>,
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
F. W. Fairholt, <hi rend='italic'>Gog and Magog, the
Giants in Guildhall, their real and
legendary History</hi> (London, 1859), pp.
78-87; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>,
p. 523, note. It is said that the giantess
made her first appearance in 1665, and
that the children were not added to the
show till the end of the seventeenth
century. In the eighteenth century the
procession took place on the third
Sunday in June, which must always
have been within about a week of
Midsummer Day (H. Gaidoz, <q>Le dieu
gaulois du soleil et le symbolisme de
la roue,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue Archéologique</hi>, iii.
série iv. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> At
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
Dunkirk the procession of the giants took place on Midsummer
Day, the twenty-fourth of June. The festival,
which was known as the Follies of Dunkirk, attracted such
multitudes of spectators, that the inns and private houses
could not lodge them all, and many had to sleep in cellars
or in the streets. In 1755 an eye-witness estimated that
the number of onlookers was not less than forty thousand,
without counting the inhabitants of the town. The streets
through which the procession took its way were lined with
double ranks of soldiers, and the houses crammed with
spectators from top to bottom. High mass was celebrated in
the principal church and then the procession got under weigh.
First came the guilds or brotherhoods, the members walking
two and two with great waxen tapers, lighted, in their hands.
They were followed by the friars and the secular priests, and
then came the Abbot, magnificently attired, with the Host
borne before him by a venerable old man. When these
were past, the real <q>Follies of Dunkirk</q> began. They consisted
of pageants of various sorts wheeled through the streets
in cars. These appear to have varied somewhat from year
to year; but if we may judge from the processions of 1755
and 1757, both of which have been described by eye-witnesses,
a standing show was a car decked with foliage and branches
to imitate a wood, and carrying a number of men dressed in
leaves or in green scaly skins, who squirted water on the
people from pewter syringes. An English spectator has
compared these maskers to the Green Men of our own country
on May Day. Last of all came the giant and giantess.
The giant was a huge figure of wicker-work, occasionally as
much as forty-five feet high, dressed in a long blue robe with
gold stripes, which reached to his feet, concealing the dozen
or more men who made it dance and bob its head to the
spectators. This colossal effigy went by the name of Papa
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
Reuss, and carried in its pocket a bouncing infant of Brobdingnagian
proportions, who kept bawling <q>Papa! papa!</q>
in a voice of thunder, only pausing from time to time to
devour the victuals which were handed out to him from the
windows. The rear was brought up by the daughter of the
giant, constructed, like her sire, of wicker-work, and little, if
at all, inferior to him in size. She wore a rose-coloured robe,
with a gold watch as large as a warming pan at her side:
her breast glittered with jewels: her complexion was high,
and her eyes and head turned with as easy a grace as the
men inside could contrive to impart to their motions. The
procession came to an end with the revolution of 1789, and
has never been revived. The giant himself indeed, who had
won the affections of the townspeople, survived his ancient
glory for a little while and made shift to appear in public a
few times more at the Carnival and other festal occasions;
but his days were numbered, and within fifty years even his
memory had seemingly perished.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Gentleman's Magazine</hi>, xxix.
(1759), pp. 263-265; Madame Clément,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire des fêtes civiles et religieuses
du département du Nord</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 169-175;
A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions
des Provinces de France</hi>, pp. 328-332.
Compare John Milner, <hi rend='italic'>The
History, Civil and Ecclesiastical, and
Survey of the Antiquities of Winchester</hi>
(Winchester, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), i. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
note 6; John Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities
of Great Britain</hi> (London, 1882-1883),
i. 325 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; James Logan, <hi rend='italic'>The
Scottish Gael or Celtic Manners</hi>, edited
by Rev. Alex. Stewart (Inverness, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>),
ii. 358. According to the writer in <hi rend='italic'>The
Gentleman's Magazine</hi> the name of the
procession was the Cor-mass.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wicker-work
giants in
Brabant
and
Flanders.</note>
Most towns and even villages of Brabant and Flanders
have, or used to have, similar wicker giants which were
annually led about to the delight of the populace, who
loved these grotesque figures, spoke of them with patriotic
enthusiasm, and never wearied of gazing at them. The
name by which the giants went was Reuzes, and a special
song called the Reuze song was sung in the Flemish dialect
while they were making their triumphal progress through
the streets. The most celebrated of these monstrous effigies
were those of Antwerp and Wetteren. At Ypres a whole
family of giants contributed to the public hilarity at the
Carnival. At Cassel and Hazebrouch, in the French department
of Nord, the giants made their annual appearance
on Shrove Tuesday.<note place='foot'>Madame Clément, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des
fêtes civiles et religieuses</hi>, etc., <hi rend='italic'>de la Belgique
méridionale</hi>, etc. (Avesnes, 1846),
p. 252; Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Calendrier Belge</hi> (Brussels,
1861-1862), i. 123-126. We may
conjecture that the Flemish <foreign rend='italic'>Reuze</foreign>, like
the <foreign rend='italic'>Reuss</foreign> of Dunkirk, is only another
form of the German <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Riese</foreign>, <q>giant.</q></note> At Antwerp the giant was so big
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
that no gate in the city was large enough to let him
go through; hence he could not visit his brother giants
in neighbouring towns, as the other Belgian giants used
to do on solemn occasions. He was designed in 1534
by Peter van Aelst, painter to the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, and is still preserved with other colossal figures
in a large hall at Antwerp.<note place='foot'>F. W. Fairholt, <hi rend='italic'>Gog and Magog,
the Giants in Guildhall, their real and
legendary History</hi> (London, 1859), pp.
64-78. For the loan of this work and
of the one cited in the next note I have
to thank Mrs. Wherry, of St. Peter's
Terrace, Cambridge.</note> At Ath, in the Belgian
province of Hainaut, the popular procession of the giants
took place annually in August down to the year 1869 at
least. For three days the colossal effigies of Goliath and
his wife, of Samson and an Archer (<foreign rend='italic'>Tirant</foreign>), together with
a two-headed eagle, were led about the streets on the
shoulders of twenty bearers concealed under the flowing
drapery of the giants, to the great delight of the townspeople
and a crowd of strangers who assembled to witness
the pageant. The custom can be traced back by documentary
evidence to the middle of the fifteenth century;
but it appears that the practice of giving Goliath a wife
dates only from the year 1715. Their nuptials were solemnized
every year on the eve of the festival in the church of
St. Julien, whither the two huge figures were escorted by the
magistrates in procession.<note place='foot'>E. Fourdin, <q>La foire d'Ath,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Annales du Cercle Archéologique de
Mons</hi>, ix. (Mons, 1869) pp. 7, 8, 12,
36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The history of the festival has
been carefully investigated, with the
help of documents by M. Fourdin.
According to him, the procession was
religious in its origin and took its rise
from a pestilence which desolated
Hainaut in 1215 (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).
He thinks that the effigies of giants
were not introduced into the procession
till between 1450 and 1460 (<hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 8).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Midsummer
giants in
England.</note>
In England artificial giants seem to have been a
standing feature of the midsummer festival. A writer of
the sixteenth century speaks of <q>Midsommer pageants in
London, where to make the people wonder, are set forth
great and uglie gyants marching as if they were alive, and
armed at all points, but within they are stuffed full of
browne paper and tow, which the shrewd boyes, underpeering,
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
do guilefully discover, and turne to a greate derision.</q><note place='foot'>George Puttenham, <hi rend='italic'>The Arte of
English Poesie</hi> (London, 1811, reprint
of the original edition of London,
1589), book iii. chapter vi. p. 128.
On the history of the English giants
and their relation to those of the
continent, see F. W. Fairholt, <hi rend='italic'>Gog
and Magog, the Giants in Guildhall,
their real and legendary History</hi>
(London, 1859).</note>
At Chester the annual pageant on Midsummer Eve included
the effigies of four giants, with animals, hobby-horses, and
other figures. An officious mayor of the town suppressed
the giants in 1599, but they were restored by another mayor
in 1601. Under the Commonwealth the pageant was discontinued,
and the giants and beasts were destroyed; but
after the restoration of Charles II. the old ceremony was
revived on the old date, new effigies being constructed to
replace those which had fallen victims to Roundhead bigotry.
The accounts preserve a record not only of the hoops, buckram,
tinfoil, gold and silver leaf, paint, glue, and paste which
went to make up these gorgeous figures; they also mention
the arsenic which was mixed with the paste in order to preserve
the poor giants from being eaten alive by the rats.<note place='foot'>Joseph Strutt, <hi rend='italic'>The Sports and
Pastimes of the People of England</hi>,
New Edition, by W. Hone (London,
1834), pp. xliii.-xlv.; F. W. Fairholt,
<hi rend='italic'>Gog and Magog, the Giants in Guildhall</hi>
(London, 1859), pp. 52-59.</note>
At Coventry the accounts of the Cappers' and Drapers'
Companies in the sixteenth century shed light on the giants
which there also were carried about the town at Midsummer;
from some of the entries it appears that the giant's wife
figured beside the giant.<note place='foot'>F. W. Fairholt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 59-61.</note> At Burford, in Oxfordshire, Midsummer
Eve used to be celebrated with great jollity by the
carrying of a giant and a dragon up and down the town.
The last survivor of these perambulating English giants
dragged out a miserable existence at Salisbury, where an
antiquary found him mouldering to decay in the neglected
hall of the Tailors' Company about the year 1844. His
bodily framework was of lath and hoop like the one which
used to be worn by Jack-in-the-Green on May Day. The
drapery, which concealed the bearer, was of coloured chintz,
bordered with red and purple, and trimmed with yellow
fringe. His head was modelled in paste-board and adorned
with a gold-laced cocked hat: his flowing locks were of
tow; and in his big right hand he brandished a branch of
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
artificial laurel. In the days of his glory he promenaded
about the streets, dancing clumsily and attended by two
men grotesquely attired, who kept a watchful eye on his
movements and checked by the wooden sword and club
which they carried any incipient tendency to lose his balance
and topple over in an undignified manner, which would have
exposed to the derision of the populace the mystery of his
inner man. The learned called him St. Christopher, the
vulgar simply the giant.<note place='foot'>F. W. Fairholt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 61-63.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wicker-work
giants
burnt at or
near Midsummer.</note>
In these cases the giants only figure in the processions.
But sometimes they were burned in the summer
bonfires. Thus the people of the Rue aux Ours in Paris
used annually to make a great wicker-work figure, dressed
as a soldier, which they promenaded up and down the
streets for several days, and solemnly burned on the third
of July, the crowd of spectators singing <hi rend='italic'>Salve Regina</hi>.
A personage who bore the title of king presided over the
ceremony with a lighted torch in his hand. The burning
fragments of the image were scattered among the people,
who eagerly scrambled for them. The custom was abolished
in 1743.<note place='foot'>Felix Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Des Gervasius von
Tilbury Otia Imperialia</hi> (Hanover,
1856), pp. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes,
Mythes, et Traditions des Provinces de
France</hi>, pp. 354 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 514.</note> In Brie, Isle de France, a wicker-work giant,
eighteen feet high, was annually burned on Midsummer
Eve.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp.
514, 523.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Animals
burnt in
the Midsummer
bonfires. Serpents
formerly
burnt in
the Midsummer
fire at
Luchon.
Cats
formerly
burnt in
the Midsummer,
Easter, and
Lenten
bonfires.</note>
Again, the Druidical custom of burning live animals,
enclosed in wicker-work, has its counterpart at the spring and
midsummer festivals. At Luchon in the Pyrenees on Midsummer
Eve <q>a hollow column, composed of strong wicker-work,
is raised to the height of about sixty feet in the centre
of the principal suburb, and interlaced with green foliage up
to the very top; while the most beautiful flowers and shrubs
procurable are artistically arranged in groups below, so as to
form a sort of background to the scene. The column is
then filled with combustible materials, ready for ignition.
At an appointed hour&mdash;about 8 <hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi>&mdash;a grand procession,
composed of the clergy, followed by young men and maidens
in holiday attire, pour forth from the town chanting hymns,
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
and take up their position around the column. Meanwhile,
bonfires are lit, with beautiful effect, in the surrounding hills.
As many living serpents as could be collected are now thrown
into the column, which is set on fire at the base by means
of torches, armed with which about fifty boys and men
dance around with frantic gestures. The serpents, to avoid
the flames, wriggle their way to the top, whence they are
seen lashing out laterally until finally obliged to drop, their
struggles for life giving rise to enthusiastic delight among
the surrounding spectators. This is a favourite annual ceremony
for the inhabitants of Luchon and its neighbourhood,
and local tradition assigns it to a heathen origin.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Athenaeum</hi>, 24th July 1869, p.
115; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>,
pp. 515 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> From a later account we
learn that about the year 1890 the
custom of lighting a bonfire and dancing
round it was still observed at Bagnères
de Luchon on Midsummer Eve, but the
practice of burning live serpents in it
had been discontinued. The fire was
kindled by a priest. See <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xii.
(1901) pp. 315-317.</note> In the
midsummer fires formerly kindled on the Place de Grève at
Paris it was the custom to burn a basket, barrel, or sack full
of live cats, which was hung from a tall mast in the midst of
the bonfire; sometimes a fox was burned. The people
collected the embers and ashes of the fire and took them
home, believing that they brought good luck. The French
kings often witnessed these spectacles and even lit the bonfire
with their own hands. In 1648 Louis the Fourteenth,
crowned with a wreath of roses and carrying a bunch of
roses in his hand, kindled the fire, danced at it and partook
of the banquet afterwards in the town hall. But this was
the last occasion when a monarch presided at the midsummer
bonfire in Paris.<note place='foot'>A. Breuil, <q>Du culte de St.-Jean
Baptiste,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Société des
Antiquaires de Picardie</hi>, viii. (1845)
pp. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Collin de Plancy, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire
Infernal</hi> (Paris, 1825-1826), iii.
40; A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes
et Traditions des Provinces de France</hi>,
pp. 355 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. W. Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur
deutschen Mythologie</hi> (Göttingen and
Leipsic, 1852-1857), ii. 388; E.
Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>Essai sur les Fêtes Religieuses</hi>
(Paris, 1867), pp. 213 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Laisnel de
la Salle, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances et Légendes du
Centre de la France</hi> (Paris, 1875), i.
82; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
515.</note> At Metz midsummer fires were lighted
with great pomp on the esplanade, and a dozen cats, enclosed
in wicker-cages, were burned alive in them, to the
amusement of the people.<note place='foot'>Tessier, in <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires et Dissertations
publiés par la Société Royale des
Antiquaires de France</hi>, v. (1823) p.
388; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>,
p. 515.</note> Similarly at Gap, in the department
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
of the High Alps, cats used to be roasted over the
midsummer bonfire.<note place='foot'>Alexandre Bertrand, <hi rend='italic'>La Religion
des Gaulois</hi> (Paris, 1897), p. 407.</note> In Russia a white cock was sometimes
burned in the midsummer bonfire;<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
i. 519; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>,
p. 515.</note> in Meissen or
Thuringia a horse's head used to be thrown into it.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
515; Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfesten,
Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</hi>
(Iserlohn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 34.</note> Sometimes
animals are burned in the spring bonfires. In the
Vosges cats were burned on Shrove Tuesday; in Alsace
they were thrown into the Easter bonfire.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
515.</note> In the department
of the Ardennes cats were flung into the bonfires
kindled on the first Sunday in Lent; sometimes, by a
refinement of cruelty, they were hung over the fire from
the end of a pole and roasted alive. <q>The cat, which
represented the devil, could never suffer enough.</q> While
the creatures were perishing in the flames, the shepherds
guarded their flocks and forced them to leap over the fire,
esteeming this an infallible means of preserving them from
disease and witchcraft.<note place='foot'>A. Meyrac, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions, Coutumes,
Légendes, et Contes des Ardenness</hi>
(Charleville, 1890), p. 68.</note> We have seen that squirrels were
sometimes burned in the Easter fire.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 142.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thus the
sacrificial
rites of the
ancient
Gauls have
their
counterparts
in
the popular
festivals of
modern
Europe.</note>
Thus it appears that the sacrificial rites of the Celts of
ancient Gaul can be traced in the popular festivals of modern
Europe. Naturally it is in France, or rather in the wider
area comprised within the limits of ancient Gaul, that these
rites have left the clearest traces in the customs of burning
giants of wicker-work and animals enclosed in wicker-work
or baskets. These customs, it will have been remarked, are
generally observed at or about midsummer. From this we
may infer that the original rites of which these are the degenerate
successors were solemnized at midsummer. This
inference harmonizes with the conclusion suggested by a
general survey of European folk-custom, that the midsummer
festival must on the whole have been the most widely diffused
and the most solemn of all the yearly festivals celebrated by
the primitive Aryans in Europe. At the same time we
must bear in mind that among the British Celts the chief
fire-festivals of the year appear certainly to have been those
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
of Beltane (May Day) and Hallowe'en (the last day of
October); and this suggests a doubt whether the Celts of
Gaul also may not have celebrated their principal rites of
fire, including their burnt sacrifices of men and animals, at
the beginning of May or the beginning of November rather
than at Midsummer.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The men,
women,
and
animals
burnt at
these
festivals
were
perhaps
thought to
be witches
or wizards
in disguise.</note>
We have still to ask, What is the meaning of such
sacrifices? Why were men and animals burnt to death at
these festivals? If we are right in interpreting the modern
European fire-festivals as attempts to break the power of
witchcraft by burning or banning the witches and warlocks,
it seems to follow that we must explain the human sacrifices
of the Celts in the same manner; that is, we must suppose
that the men whom the Druids burnt in wicker-work images
were condemned to death on the ground that they were
witches or wizards, and that the mode of execution by fire
was chosen because, as we have seen, burning alive is
deemed the surest mode of getting rid of these noxious
and dangerous beings. The same explanation would apply
to the cattle and wild animals of many kinds which the
Celts burned along with the men.<note place='foot'>Strabo, iv. 4. 5, p. 198, καὶ ἄλλα
δὲ ἀνθρωποθυσιῶν εἴδη λέγεται; καὶ
γὰρ κατετόξευόν τινας καὶ ἀνεσταύρουν ἐν
τοῖς ἱεροῖς καὶ κατασκευάσαντες κολοσσὸν
χόρτου καὶ ξύλων, ἐμβαλόντες εἰς τοῦτον
βοσκήματα καὶ θηρία παντοῖα καὶ ἀνθρώπους
ὡλοκαύτουν.</note> They, too, we may
conjecture, were supposed to be either under the spell
of witchcraft or actually to be the witches and wizards,
who had transformed themselves into animals for the
purpose of prosecuting their infernal plots against the welfare
of their fellow creatures. This conjecture is confirmed by
the observation that the victims most commonly burned
in modern bonfires have been cats, and that cats are precisely
the animals into which, with the possible exception
of hares, witches were most usually supposed to transform
themselves. Again, we have seen that serpents and foxes
used sometimes to be burnt in the midsummer fires;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</note>
and Welsh and German witches are reported to have
assumed the form both of foxes and serpents.<note place='foot'>Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and
Folk-stories of Wales</hi> (London, 1909),
pp. 214, 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ulrich Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Hexenwesen
und Zauberei in Pommern</hi>
(Breslau, 1886), p. 7; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Volkssagen
aus Pommern und Rügen</hi> (Stettin,
1886), p. 353, No. 446.</note> In short,
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
when we remember the great variety of animals whose forms
witches can assume at pleasure,<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. p. 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1.</note> it seems easy on this hypothesis
to account for the variety of living creatures that have
been burnt at festivals both in ancient Gaul and modern
Europe; all these victims, we may surmise, were doomed to
the flames, not because they were animals, but because they
were believed to be witches who had taken the shape of
animals for their nefarious purposes. One advantage of
explaining the ancient Celtic sacrifices in this way is that it
introduces, as it were, a harmony and consistency into the
treatment which Europe has meted out to witches from
the earliest times down to about two centuries ago, when
the growing influence of rationalism discredited the belief
in witchcraft and put a stop to the custom of burning
witches. On this view the Christian Church in its dealings
with the black art merely carried out the traditional policy
of Druidism, and it might be a nice question to decide
which of the two, in pursuance of that policy, exterminated
the larger number of innocent men and women.<note place='foot'>The treatment of magic and witchcraft
by the Christian Church is described
by W. E. H. Lecky, <hi rend='italic'>History
of the Rise and Influence of the Spirit
of Rationalism in Europe</hi>, New Edition
(London, 1882), i. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Four hundred
witches were burned at one time
in the great square of Toulouse (W. E.
H. Lecky, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 38). Writing at
the beginning of the eighteenth century
Addison observes: <q>Before I leave
Switzerland I cannot but observe, that
the notion of witchcraft reigns very
much in this country. I have often
been tired with accounts of this nature
from very sensible men, who are most
of them furnished with matters of fact
which have happened, as they pretend,
within the compass of their own knowledge.
It is certain there have been
many executions on this account, as in
the canton of Berne there were some
put to death during my stay at Geneva.
The people are so universally infatuated
with the notion, that if a cow
falls sick, it is ten to one but an old
woman is clapt up in prison for it, and
if the poor creature chance to think
herself a witch, the whole country is
for hanging her up without mercy.</q>
See <hi rend='italic'>The Works of Joseph Addison</hi>,
with notes by R. Hurd, D.D. (London,
1811), vol. ii., <q>Remarks on several
Parts of Italy,</q> p. 196.</note> Be that
as it may, we can now perhaps understand why the Druids
believed that the more persons they sentenced to death, the
greater would be the fertility of the land.<note place='foot'>Strabo, iv. 4. 4, p. 197. See
the passage quoted above, p. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>,
note 2.</note> To a modern
reader the connexion at first sight may not be obvious
between the activity of the hangman and the productivity
of the earth. But a little reflection may satisfy him that
when the criminals who perish at the stake or on the
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
gallows are witches, whose delight it is to blight the crops
of the farmer or to lay them low under storms of hail, the
execution of these wretches is really calculated to ensure
an abundant harvest by removing one of the principal
causes which paralyze the efforts and blast the hopes of the
husbandman.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mannhardt
thought
that the
men and
animals
whom the
Druids
burned in
wickerwork
images
represented
spirits of
vegetation,
and that the
burning of
them was a
charm to
secure a
supply of
sunshine
for the
crops.</note>
The Druidical sacrifices which we are considering were
explained in a different way by W. Mannhardt. He supposed
that the men whom the Druids burned in wickerwork
images represented the spirits of vegetation, and accordingly
that the custom of burning them was a magical ceremony
intended to secure the necessary sunshine for the crops.
Similarly, he seems to have inclined to the view that the
animals which used to be burnt in the bonfires represented
the corn-spirit,<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp.
532-534.</note> which, as we saw in an earlier part of this
work, is often supposed to assume the shape of an animal.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>,
i. 270-305.</note>
This theory is no doubt tenable, and the great authority of
W. Mannhardt entitles it to careful consideration. I adopted
it in former editions of this book; but on reconsideration it
seems to me on the whole to be less probable than the theory
that the men and animals burnt in the fires perished in the
character of witches. This latter view is strongly supported
by the testimony of the people who celebrate the fire-festivals,
since a popular name for the custom of kindling the fires is
<q>burning the witches,</q> effigies of witches are sometimes
consumed in the flames, and the fires, their embers, or their
ashes are supposed to furnish protection against witchcraft.
On the other hand there is little to shew that the effigies
or the animals burnt in the fires are regarded by the
people as representatives of the vegetation-spirit, and that
the bonfires are sun-charms. With regard to serpents in
particular, which used to be burnt in the midsummer fire at
Luchon, I am not aware of any certain evidence that in
Europe snakes have been regarded as embodiments of the
tree-spirit or corn-spirit,<note place='foot'>Some of the serpents worshipped
by the old Prussians lived in hollow
oaks, and as oaks were sacred among
the Prussians, the serpents may possibly
have been regarded as genii of the
trees. See Simon Grunau, <hi rend='italic'>Preussischer
Chronik</hi>, herausgegeben von Dr. M.
Perlbach, i. (Leipsic, 1876) p. 89;
Christophor Hartknoch, <hi rend='italic'>Alt und Neues
Preussen</hi> (Frankfort and Leipsic,
1684), pp. 143, 163. Serpents played
an important part in the worship of
Demeter, but we can hardly assume
that they were regarded as embodiments
of the goddess. See <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of
the Corn and of the Wild</hi>, ii. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> though in other parts of the world
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
the conception appears to be not unknown.<note place='foot'>For example, in China the spirits
of plants are thought to assume the form
of snakes oftener than that of any other
animal. Chinese literature abounds with
stories illustrative of such transformations.
See J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, iv. (Leyden,
1901) pp. 283-286. In Siam the spirit
of the <foreign rend='italic'>takhien</foreign> tree is said to appear
sometimes in the shape of a serpent
and sometimes in that of a woman.
See Adolph Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Voelker des
Oestlichen Asien</hi>, iii. (Jena, 1867) p.
251. The vipers that haunted the
balsam trees in Arabia were regarded
by the Arabs as sacred to the trees
(Pausanias, ix. 28. 4); and once in
Arabia, when a wood hitherto untouched
by man was burned down to
make room for the plough, certain
white snakes flew out of it with loud
lamentations. No doubt they were
supposed to be the dispossessed spirits
of the trees. See J. Wellhausen,
<hi rend='italic'>Reste Arabischen Heidentums</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin,
1897), pp. 108 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Whereas
the popular faith in the transformation of witches into
animals is so general and deeply rooted, and the fear of
these uncanny beings is so strong, that it seems safer to
suppose that the cats and other animals which were burnt in
the fire suffered death as embodiments of witches than that
they perished as representatives of vegetation-spirits.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. The Magic Flowers of Midsummer Eve.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>It is a
common
belief in
Europe
that plants
acquire
certain
magical,
but
transient,
virtues on
Midsummer
Eve.
Magical
plants
culled on
Midsummer
Eve (St.
John's Eve)
or Midsummer
Day (St.
John's
Day) in
France. St. John's
herb.</note>
A feature of the great midsummer festival remains to be
considered, which may perhaps help to clear up the doubt
as to the meaning of the fire-ceremonies and their relation
to Druidism. For in France and England, the countries
where the sway of the Druids is known to have been most
firmly established, Midsummer Eve is still the time for
culling certain magic plants, whose evanescent virtue can
be secured at this mystic season alone. Indeed all over
Europe antique fancies of the same sort have lingered about
Midsummer Eve, imparting to it a fragrance of the past,
like withered rose leaves that, found by chance in the pages
of an old volume, still smell of departed summers. Thus in
Saintonge and Aunis, two of the ancient provinces of Western
France, we read that <q>of all the festivals for which the merry
bells ring out there is not one which has given rise to a
greater number of superstitious practices than the festival of
St. John the Baptist. The Eve of St. John was the day of
all days for gathering the wonderful herbs by means of which
you could combat fever, cure a host of diseases, and guard
yourself against sorcerers and their spells. But in order to
attain these results two conditions had to be observed; first,
you must be fasting when you gathered the herbs, and
second, you must cull them before the sun rose. If these
conditions were not fulfilled, the plants had no special virtue.</q><note place='foot'>J. L. M. Noguès, <hi rend='italic'>Les mœurs
d'autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis</hi>
(Saintes, 1891), p. 71. Amongst the
superstitious practices denounced by
the French writer J. B. Thiers in the
seventeenth century was <q>the gathering
of certain herbs between the Eve
of St. John and the Eve of St. Peter
and keeping them in a bottle to heal
certain maladies.</q> See J. B. Thiers,
<hi rend='italic'>Traité des Superstitions</hi> (Paris, 1679),
p. 321.</note>
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
In the neighbouring province of Perigord the person who
gathered the magic herbs before sunrise at this season had
to walk backwards, to mutter some mystic words, and to
perform certain ceremonies. The plants thus collected were
carefully kept as an infallible cure for fever; placed above
beds and the doors of houses and of cattle-sheds they protected
man and beast from disease, witchcraft, and accident.<note place='foot'>A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes et
Traditions des Provinces de France</hi>
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In Normandy a belief in the marvellous properties of herbs
and plants, of flowers and seeds and leaves gathered, with
certain traditional rites, on the Eve or the Day of St. John
has remained part of the peasant's creed to this day. Thus
he fancies that seeds of vegetables and plants, which have
been collected on St. John's Eve, will keep better than
others, and that flowers plucked that day will never fade.<note place='foot'>Jules Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage
Normand</hi> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887),
ii. 8, 244; Amélie Bosquet,
<hi rend='italic'>La Normandie romanesque et merveilleuse</hi>
(Paris and Rouen, 1845), p.
294.</note>
Indeed so widespread in France used to be the faith in the
magic virtue of herbs culled on that day that there is a
French proverb <q>to employ all the herbs of St. John in an
affair,</q> meaning <q>to leave no stone unturned.</q><note place='foot'>De la Loubere, <hi rend='italic'>Du Royaume de
Siam</hi> (Amsterdam, 1691), i. 202.
The writer here mentions an Italian
mode of divination practised on Midsummer
Eve. People washed their
feet in wine and threw the wine out
of the window. After that, the first
words they heard spoken by passers-by
were deemed oracular.</note> In the
early years of the nineteenth century a traveller reported
that at Marseilles, <q>on the Eve of St. John, the Place de
Noailles and the course are cleaned. From three o'clock
in the morning the country-people flock thither, and by
six o'clock the whole place is covered with a considerable
quantity of flowers and herbs, aromatic or otherwise. The
folk attribute superstitious virtues to these plants; they are
persuaded that if they have been gathered the same day before
sunrise they are fitted to heal many ailments. People buy
them emulously to give away in presents and to fill the
house with.</q><note place='foot'>Aubin-Louis Millin, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans
les Départements du Midi de la France</hi>
(Paris, 1807-1811), iii. 344 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On the Eve of St. John (Midsummer Eve),
before sunset, the peasants of Perche still gather the herb
called St. John's herb. It is a creeping plant, very aromatic,
with small flowers of a violet blue. Other scented flowers
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
are added, and out of the posies they make floral crosses
and crowns, which they hang up over the doors of houses
and stables. Such floral decorations are sold like the box-wood
on Palm Sunday, and the withered wreaths are kept
from year to year. If an animal dies, it may be a cow, they
carefully clean the byre or the stable, make a pile of these
faded garlands, and set them on fire, having previously closed
up all the openings and interstices, so that the whole place
is thoroughly fumigated. This is thought to eradicate the
germs of disease from the byre or stable.<note place='foot'>Alexandre Bertrand, <hi rend='italic'>La Religion
des Gaulois</hi> (Paris, 1897), p. 124. In
French the name of St. John's herb
(<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>herbe de la Saint-Jean</foreign>) is usually given
to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>millepertius</foreign>, that is, St. John's wort,
which is quite a different flower. See
below, pp. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> But <q>St. John's
herb</q> may well be a general term
which in different places is applied to
different plants.</note> At Nellingen,
near Saaralben, in Lorraine the hedge doctors collect their
store of simples between eleven o'clock and noon on Midsummer
Day; and on that day nut-water is brewed from
nuts that have been picked on the stroke of noon. Such
water is a panacea for all ailments.<note place='foot'>Bruno Stehle, <q>Aberglauben,
Sitten und Gebräuche in Lothringen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lix. (1891) p. 379.</note> In the Vosges
Mountains they say that wizards have but one day in the
year, and but one hour in that day, to find and cull the
baleful herbs which they use in their black art. That day
is the Eve of St. John, and that hour is the time when the
church bells are ringing the noonday Angelus. Hence in
many villages they say that the bells ought not to ring at
noon on that day.<note place='foot'>L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore des
Hautes-Vosges</hi> (Paris, 1889), pp. 168
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Magical
plants
culled on
Midsummer
Eve or
Midsummer
Day in the
Tyrol and
Germany.</note>
In the Tyrol also they think that the witching hour
is when the <hi rend='italic'>Ave Maria</hi> bell is ringing on Midsummer
Eve, for then the witches go forth to gather the noxious
plants whereby they raise thunderstorms. Therefore in
many districts the bells ring for a shorter time than usual
that evening;<note place='foot'>I. V. Zingerle, <q>Wald, Bäume,
Kräuter,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie
und Sittenkunde</hi>, i. (1853)
pp. 332 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche und
Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Innsbruck,
1871), p. 158, §§ 1345, 1348.</note> at Folgareit the sexton used to steal quietly
into the church, and when the clock struck three he contented
himself with giving a few pulls to the smallest of the bells.<note place='foot'>Christian Schneller, <hi rend='italic'>Märchen und
Sagen aus Wälschtirol</hi> (Innsbruck,
1867), p. 237, § 24.</note>
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
At Rengen, in the Eifel Mountains, the sexton rings the
church bell for an hour on the afternoon of Midsummer Day.
As soon as the bell begins to ring, the children run out into the
meadows, gather flowers, and weave them into garlands which
they throw on the roofs of the houses and buildings. There the
garlands remain till the wind blows them away. It is believed
that they protect the houses against fire and thunderstorms.<note place='foot'>J. H. Schmitz, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten und Bräuche,
Lieder, Sprüchwörter und Räthsel des
Eifler Volkes</hi> (Treves, 1856-1858), i. 40.</note>
At Niederehe, in the Eifel Mountains, on Midsummer Day
little children used to make wreaths and posies out of <q>St.
John's flowers and Maiden-flax</q> and throw them on the
roofs. Some time afterwards, when the wild gooseberries
were ripe, all the children would gather round an old
woman on a Sunday afternoon, and taking the now withered
wreaths and posies with them march out of the village,
praying while they walked. Wreaths and posies were then
thrown in a heap and kindled, whereupon the children
snatched them up, still burning, and ran and fumigated the
wild gooseberry bushes with the smoke. Then they returned
with the old woman to the village, knelt down before her,
and received her blessing. From that time the children
were free to pick and eat the wild gooseberries.<note place='foot'>J. H. Schmitz, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 42.</note> In the
Mark of Brandenburg the peasants gather all sorts of
simples on Midsummer Day, because they are of opinion
that the drugs produce their medicinal effect only if they
have been culled at that time. Many of these plants,
especially roots, must be dug up at midnight and in silence.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi> (Berlin, 1843), p. 330.</note>
In Mecklenburg not merely is a special healing virtue ascribed
to simples collected on Midsummer Day; the very smoke of
such plants, if they are burned in the fire, is believed to protect
a house against thunder and lightning, and to still the
raging of the storm.<note place='foot'>K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</hi> (Vienna,
1879-1880), ii. p. 287, § 1436.</note> The Wends of the Spreewald twine
wreaths of herbs and flowers at midsummer, and hang them
up in their rooms; and when any one gets a fright he will
lay some of the leaves and blossoms on hot coals and fumigate
himself with the smoke.<note place='foot'>W. von Schulenburg, <hi rend='italic'>Wendische
Volkssagen und Gebräuche aus dem
Spreewald</hi> (Leipsic, 1880), p. 254.</note> In Eastern Prussia, some
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
two hundred years ago, it used to be customary on Midsummer
Day to make up a bunch of herbs of various sorts
and fasten it to a pole, which was then put up over the gate
or door through which the corn would be brought in at
harvest. Such a pole was called Kaupole, and it remained
in its place till the crops had been reaped and garnered.
Then the bunch of herbs was taken down; part of it was
put with the corn in the barn to keep rats and mice from
the grain, and part was kept as a remedy for diseases of all
sorts.<note place='foot'>M. Prätorius, <hi rend='italic'>Deliciae Prussicae</hi>
(Berlin, 1871), pp. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Kaupole is
probably identical in name with Kupole
or Kupalo, as to whom see <hi rend='italic'>The Dying
God</hi>, pp. 261 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Magical
plants
culled on
Midsummer
Eve (St.
John's Eve)
or Midsummer
Day in
Austria and
Russia.</note>
The Germans of West Bohemia collect simples on St.
John's Night, because they believe the healing virtue of the
plants to be especially powerful at that time.<note place='foot'>Alois John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), p. 86.</note> The theory
and practice of the Huzuls in the Carpathian Mountains are
similar; they imagine that the plants gathered on that night
are not only medicinal but possess the power of restraining
the witches; some say that the herbs should be plucked in
twelve gardens or meadows.<note place='foot'>R. F. Kaindl, <hi rend='italic'>Die Huzulen</hi>
(Vienna, 1894), pp. 78, 90, 93, 105;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Zauberglaube bei den Huzulen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxvi. (1899) p. 256.</note> Among the simples which the
Czechs and Moravians of Silesia cull at this season are
dandelions, ribwort, and the bloom of the lime-tree.<note place='foot'>Dr. F. Tetzner, <q>Die Tschechen
und Mährer in Schlesien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lxxviii. (1900) p. 340.</note> The
Esthonians of the island of Oesel gather St. John's herbs
(<foreign rend='italic'>Jani rohhud</foreign>) on St. John's Day, tie them up in bunches, and
hang them up about the houses to prevent evil spirits from
entering. A subsidiary use of the plants is to cure diseases;
gathered at that time they have a greater medical value than
if they were collected at any other season. Everybody does
not choose exactly the same sorts of plants; some gather
more and some less, but in the collection St. John's wort
(<foreign rend='italic'>Jani rohhi</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hypericum perforatum</foreign>) should never be wanting.<note place='foot'>J. B. Holzmayer, <q>Osiliana,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen
Gesellschaft</hi>, vii. Heft 2 (Dorpat,
1872), p. 62.</note>
A writer of the early part of the seventeenth century informs
us that the Livonians, among whom he lived, were impressed
with a belief in the great and marvellous properties possessed
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
by simples which had been culled on Midsummer Day. Such
simples, they thought, were sure remedies for fever and for
sickness and pestilence in man and beast; but if gathered
one day too late they lost all their virtue.<note place='foot'>P. Einhorn, <q>Wiederlegunge der
Abgötterey: der ander (<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>) Theil,</q>
printed at Riga in 1627, and reprinted
in <hi rend='italic'>Scriptores rerum Livonicarum</hi>, ii.
(Riga and Leipsic, 1848) pp. 651 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the
Letts of the Baltic provinces of Russia girls and women go
about on Midsummer Day crowned with wreaths of aromatic
plants, which are afterwards hung up for good luck in the
houses. The plants are also dried and given to cows to eat,
because they are supposed to help the animals to calve.<note place='foot'>J. G. Kohl, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsch-russischen
Ostseeprovinzen</hi> (Dresden and Leipsic,
1841), ii. 26.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Magical
plants
culled on
St. John's
Eve or St.
John's Day
among the
South
Slavs, in
Macedonia,
and
Bolivia.</note>
In Bulgaria St. John's Day is the special season for
culling simples. On this day, too, Bulgarian girls gather
nosegays of a certain white flower, throw them into a vessel
of water, and place the vessel under a rose-tree in bloom.
Here it remains all night. Next morning they set it in the
courtyard and dance singing round it. An old woman then
takes the flowers out of the vessel, and the girls wash themselves
with the water, praying that God would grant them
health throughout the year. After that the old woman
restores her nosegay to each girl and promises her a rich
husband.<note place='foot'>A. Strausz, <hi rend='italic'>Die Bulgaren</hi> (Leipsic,
1898), pp. 348, 386.</note> Among the South Slavs generally on St. John's
Eve it is the custom for girls to gather white flowers in the
meadows and to place them in a sieve or behind the rafters.
A flower is assigned to each member of the household: next
morning the flowers are inspected; and he or she whose
flower is fresh will be well the whole year, but he or she
whose flower is faded will be sickly or die. Garlands are
then woven out of the flowers and laid on roofs, folds, and
beehives.<note place='foot'>F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Volksglaube und
religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</hi> (Münster
i. W., 1890), p. 34.</note> In some parts of Macedonia on St. John's Eve
the peasants are wont to festoon their cottages and gird their
own waists with wreaths of what they call St. John's flower;
it is the blossom of a creeping plant which resembles honeysuckle.<note place='foot'>G. F. Abbott, <hi rend='italic'>Macedonian Folk-lore</hi>
(Cambridge, 1903), pp. 54, 58.</note>
Similar notions as to the magical virtue which
plants acquire at midsummer have been transported by
Europeans to the New World. At La Paz in Bolivia people
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
believe that flowers of mint (<foreign rend='italic'>Yerba buena</foreign>) gathered before
sunrise on St. John's Day foretell an endless felicity to such
as are so lucky as to find them.<note place='foot'>H. A. Weddell, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans le
Nord de la Bolivie et dans les parties
voisines du Pérou</hi> (Paris and London,
1853), p. 181.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Magical
plants
culled at
Midsummer
among the
Mohammedans
of
Morocco.</note>
Nor is the superstition confined to Europe and to people
of European descent. In Morocco also the Mohammedans
are of opinion that certain plants, such as penny-royal, marjoram,
and the oleander, acquire a special magic virtue
(<foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>baraka</foreign>) when they are gathered shortly before midsummer.
Hence the people collect these plants at this season and
preserve them for magical or medical purposes. For example,
branches of oleander are brought into the houses
before midsummer and kept under the roof as a charm
against the evil eye; but while the branches are being
brought in they may not touch the ground, else they
would lose their marvellous properties. Cases of sickness
caused by the evil eye are cured by fumigating the
patients with the smoke of these boughs. The greatest
efficacy is ascribed to <q>the sultan of the oleander,</q> which is
a stalk with four pairs of leaves clustered round it. Such
a stalk is always endowed with magical virtue, but that
virtue is greatest when the stalk has been cut just before
midsummer. Arab women in the Hiaina district of Morocco
gather <foreign rend='italic'>Daphne gnidium</foreign> on Midsummer Day, dry it in the
sun, and make it into a powder which, mixed with water,
they daub on the heads of their little children to protect
them from sunstroke and vermin and to make their hair
grow well. Indeed such marvellous powers do these Arabs
attribute to plants at this mystic season that a barren
woman will walk naked about a vegetable garden on Midsummer
Night in the hope of conceiving a child through the
fertilizing influence of the vegetables.<note place='foot'>W. Westermarck, <q>Midsummer
Customs in Morocco,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xvi.
(1905) p. 35; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ceremonies and
Beliefs connected with Agriculture,
certain Dates of the Solar Year, and
the Weather in Morocco</hi> (Helsingfors,
1913), pp. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Seven
different
sorts of
magical
plants
gathered
at Midsummer. Nine
different
sorts of
plants
gathered
at Midsummer.
Dreams
of love on
flowers
at Midsummer
Eve.
Love's
watery
mirror
at Midsummer
Eve.</note>
Sometimes in order to produce the desired effect it is
deemed necessary that seven or nine different sorts of plants
should be gathered at this mystic season. Norman peasants,
who wish to fortify themselves for the toil of harvest, will
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
sometimes go out at dawn on St. John's Day and pull seven
kinds of plants, which they afterwards eat in their soup as a
means of imparting strength and suppleness to their limbs in
the harvest field.<note place='foot'>J. Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage
Normand</hi> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887),
ii. 9.</note> In Mecklenburg maidens are wont to
gather seven sorts of flowers at noon on Midsummer Eve.
These they weave into garlands, and sleep with them under
their pillows. Then they are sure to dream of the men who
will marry them.<note place='foot'>K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</hi> (Vienna,
1879-1890), ii. 285.</note> But the flowers on which youthful lovers
dream at Midsummer Eve are oftener nine in number. Thus
in Voigtland nine different kinds of flowers are twined into
a garland at the hour of noon, but they may not enter the
dwelling by the door in the usual way; they must be passed
through the window, or, if they come in at the door, they
must be thrown, not carried, into the house. Sleeping on
them that night you will dream of your future wife or future
husband.<note place='foot'>J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch,
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte
Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande</hi> (Leipsic,
1867), p. 376.</note> The Bohemian maid, who gathers nine kinds of
flowers on which to dream of love at Midsummer Eve, takes
care to wrap her hand in a white cloth, and afterwards to
wash it in dew; and when she brings her garland home she
must speak no word to any soul she meets by the way, for
then all the magic virtue of the flowers would be gone.<note place='foot'>O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi>
(Prague, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 312.</note>
Other Bohemian girls look into the book of fate at this
season after a different fashion. They twine their hair with
wreaths made of nine sorts of leaves, and go, when the stars
of the summer night are twinkling in the sky, to a brook
that flows beside a tree. There, gazing on the stream, the
girl beholds, beside the broken reflections of the tree and the
stars, the watery image of her future lord.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>loc. cit.</hi></note> So in Masuren
maidens gather nosegays of wild flowers in silence on Midsummer
Eve. At the midnight hour each girl takes the
nosegay and a glass of water, and when she has spoken
certain words she sees her lover mirrored in the water.<note place='foot'>M. Töppen, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben aus Masuren</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Danzig, 1867), p. 72.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Garlands
of flowers
of nine
sorts
gathered
at Midsummer
and used
in divination
and
medicine.</note>
Sometimes Bohemian damsels make a different use of
their midsummer garlands twined of nine sorts of flowers.
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
They lie down with the garland laid as a pillow under their
right ear, and a hollow voice, swooning from underground,
proclaims their destiny.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>loc. cit.</hi></note> Yet another mode of consulting the
oracle by means of these same garlands is to throw them
backwards and in silence upon a tree at the hour of noon,
just when the flowers have been gathered. For every time
that the wreath is thrown without sticking to the branches
of the tree the girl will have a year to wait before she weds.
This mode of divination is practised in Voigtland,<note place='foot'>J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch</hi>, etc.,
<hi rend='italic'>im Voigtlande</hi>, p. 376.</note> East
Prussia,<note place='foot'>C. Lemke, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches in
Ostpreussen</hi> (Mohrungen, 1884-1887),
i. 20.</note> Silesia,<note place='foot'>P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic,
1903-1906), i. 144 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Belgium,<note place='foot'>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Calendrier Belge</hi> (Brussels, 1861-1862),
i. 423.</note> and Wales,<note place='foot'>Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and
Folk-stories of Wales</hi> (London, 1909),
p. 252.</note> and the same thing
is done in Masuren, although we are not told that there the
wreaths must be composed of nine sorts of flowers.<note place='foot'>M. Töppen, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben aus Masuren</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
p. 72.</note> However,
in Masuren chaplets of nine kinds of herbs are gathered on
St. John's Eve and put to a more prosaic use than that of
presaging the course of true love. They are carefully preserved,
and the people brew a sort of tea from them, which
they administer as a remedy for many ailments; or they keep
the chaplets under their pillows till they are dry, and thereupon
dose their sick cattle with them.<note place='foot'>M. Töppen, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 71.</note> In Esthonia the
virtues popularly ascribed to wreaths of this sort are many
and various. These wreaths, composed of nine kinds of
herbs culled on the Eve or the Day of St. John, are sometimes
inserted in the roof or hung up on the walls of the
house, and each of them receives the name of one of the
inmates. If the plants which have been thus dedicated to
a girl happen to take root and grow in the chinks and
crannies, she will soon wed; if they have been dedicated to
an older person and wither away, that person will die. The
people also give them as medicine to cattle at the time when
the animals are driven forth to pasture; or they fumigate
the beasts with the smoke of the herbs, which are burnt
along with shavings from the wooden threshold. Bunches
of the plants are also hung about the house to keep off evil
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
spirits, and maidens lay them under their pillows to dream
on.<note place='foot'>A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem inneren
und äussern Leben der Ehsten</hi> (St.
Petersburg, 1876), pp. 362 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Sweden the <q>Midsummer Brooms,</q> made up of nine
sorts of flowers gathered on Midsummer Eve, are put to
nearly the same uses. Fathers of families hang up such
<q>brooms</q> to the rafters, one for each inmate of the house;
and he or she whose broom (<foreign lang='sv' rend='italic'>quast</foreign>) is the first to wither will
be the first to die. Girls also dream of their future husbands
with these bunches of flowers under their pillows. A
decoction made from the flowers is, moreover, a panacea for
all disorders, and if a bunch of them be hung up in the
cattle shed, the Troll cannot enter to bewitch the beasts.<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>
(London, 1870), pp. 267 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The Germans of Moravia think that nine kinds of herbs
gathered on St. John's Night (Midsummer Eve) are a remedy
for fever;<note place='foot'>Willibald Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur
Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</hi>
(Vienna and Olmütz, 1893), p. 264.</note> and some of the Wends attribute a curative
virtue in general to such plants.<note place='foot'>W. von Schulenburg, <hi rend='italic'>Wendisches
Volksthum</hi> (Berlin, 1882), p. 145.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>St. John's
wort (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hypericum
perforatum</foreign>)
gathered
for magical
purposes
at Midsummer. St. John's
blood on
St. John's
Day.</note>
Of the flowers which it has been customary to gather for
purposes of magic or divination at midsummer none perhaps
is so widely popular as St. John's wort (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hypericum perforatum</foreign>).
The reason for associating this particular plant
with the great summer festival is perhaps not far to seek, for
the flower blooms about Midsummer Day, and with its bright
yellow petals and masses of golden stamens it might well
pass for a tiny copy on earth of the great sun which reaches
its culminating point in heaven at this season. Gathered on
Midsummer Eve, or on Midsummer Day before sunrise, the
blossoms are hung on doorways and windows to preserve the
house against thunder, witches, and evil spirits; and various
healing properties are attributed to the different species of
the plant. In the Tyrol they say that if you put St. John's
wort in your shoe before sunrise on Midsummer Day you
may walk as far as you please without growing weary. In
Scotland people carried it about their persons as an amulet
against witchcraft. On the lower Rhine children twine
chaplets of St. John's wort on the morning of Midsummer
Day, and throw them on the roofs of the houses. Here, too,
the people who danced round the midsummer bonfires used
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
to wear wreaths of these yellow flowers in their hair, and to
deck the images of the saints at wayside shrines with the
blossoms. Sometimes they flung the flowers into the
bonfires. In Sicily they dip St. John's wort in oil, and so
apply it as a balm for every wound. During the Middle
Ages the power which the plant notoriously possesses of
banning devils won for it the name of <foreign rend='italic'>fuga daemonum</foreign>; and
before witches and wizards were stretched on the rack or
otherwise tortured, the flower used to be administered to
them as a means of wringing the truth from their lips.<note place='foot'>Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfeste,
Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</hi>
(Iserlohn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 145; A.
Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 100, § 134; I. V.
Zingerle, <q>Wald, Bäume, Kräuter,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und
Sittenkunde</hi>, i. (1853) p. 329; A.
Schlossar, <q>Volksmeinung und Volksaberglaube
aus der deutschen Steiermark,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, N.R., xxiv. (1891)
p. 387; E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen,
Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>
(Stuttgart, 1852), p. 428; J. Brand,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</hi>
(London, 1882-1883), i. 307, 312;
T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of
Plants</hi> (London, 1889), pp. 62, 286;
Rev. Hilderic Friend, <hi rend='italic'>Flowers and
Flower Lore</hi>, Third Edition (London,
1886), pp. 147, 149, 150, 540; G.
Finamore, <hi rend='italic'>Credenze, Usi e Costumi
Abruzzesi</hi> (Palermo, 1890), pp. 161
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. Pitrè, <hi rend='italic'>Spettacoli e Feste Popolari
Siciliane</hi> (Palermo, 1881), p. 309. One
authority lays down the rule that you
should gather the plant fasting and in
silence (J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 312).
According to Sowerby, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hypericum
perforatum</foreign> flowers in England about
July and August (<hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>, vol.
v. London, 1796, p. 295). We should
remember, however, that in the old
calendar Midsummer Day fell twelve
days later than at present. The reform
of the calendar probably put many old
floral superstitions out of joint.</note> In
North Wales people used to fix sprigs of St. John's wort
over their doors, and sometimes over their windows, <q>in
order to purify their houses, and by that means drive away
all fiends and evil spirits.</q><note place='foot'>Bingley, <hi rend='italic'>Tour round North Wales</hi>
(1800), ii. 237, quoted by T. F.
Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British Popular Customs</hi>
(London, 1876), p. 320. Compare
Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and
Folk-stories of Wales</hi> (London, 1909),
p. 251: <q>St. John's, or Midsummer
Day, was an important festival. St.
John's wort, gathered at noon on that
day, was considered good for several
complaints. The old saying went that
if anybody dug the devil's bit at midnight
on the eve of St. John, the roots
were then good for driving the devil
and witches away.</q> Apparently by <q>the
devil's bit</q> we are to understand St.
John's wort.</note> In Saintonge and Aunis the
flowers served to detect the presence of sorcerers, for if one
of these pestilent fellows entered a house, the bunches of St.
John's wort, which had been gathered on Midsummer Eve
and hung on the walls, immediately dropped their yellow
heads as if they had suddenly faded.<note place='foot'>J. L. M. Noguès, <hi rend='italic'>Les mœurs
d'autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis</hi>
(Saintes, 1891), pp. 71 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> However, the Germans
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
of Western Bohemia think that witches, far from dreading
St. John's wort, actually seek the plant on St. John's Eve.<note place='foot'>Alois John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), p. 84. They call the
plant <q>witch's herb</q> (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Hexenkraut</foreign>).</note>
Further, the edges of the calyx and petals of St. John's wort,
as well as their external surface, are marked with dark purple
spots and lines, which, if squeezed, yield a red essential oil
soluble in spirits.<note place='foot'>James Sowerby, <hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>,
vol. v. (London, 1796), p. 295.</note> German peasants believe that this red
oil is the blood of St. John,<note place='foot'>Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfeste,
Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</hi>
(Iserlohn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 35.</note> and this may be why the plant
is supposed to heal all sorts of wounds.<note place='foot'>T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of
Plants</hi> (London, 1889), p. 286; K.
Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche
aus Mecklenburg</hi>, ii. p. 291, § 1450<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>.
The Germans of Bohemia ascribe
wonderful virtues to the red juice extracted
from the yellow flowers of St.
John's wort (W. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur
Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</hi>,
Vienna and Olmütz, 1893, p. 264).</note> In Mecklenburg
they say that if you pull up St. John's wort at noon on
Midsummer Day you will find at the root a bead of red
juice called St. John's blood; smear this blood on your shirt
just over your heart, and no mad dog will bite you.<note place='foot'>K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. p. 286, §
1433. The blood is also a preservative
against many diseases (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii.
p. 290, § 1444).</note> In the
Mark of Brandenburg the same blood, procured in the same
manner and rubbed on the barrel of a gun, will make every
shot from that gun to hit the mark.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi> (Berlin, 1843), p. 387, § 105.</note> According to others,
St. John's blood is found at noon on St. John's Day, and
only then, adhering in the form of beads to the root of a
weed called knawel, which grows in sandy soil. But some
people say that these beads of red juice are not really the
blood of the martyred saint, but only insects resembling the
cochineal or kermes-berry.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi>
(Chemnitz, 1759), pp. 246 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Montanus,
<hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfesten, Volksbräuche
und deutscher Volksglaube</hi>, p.
147.</note> <q>About Hanover I have often
observed devout Roman Catholics going on the morning of
St. John's day to neighbouring sandhills, gathering on the
roots of herbs a certain insect (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Coccus Polonica</foreign>) looking
like drops of blood, and thought by them to be created
on purpose to keep alive the remembrance of the foul
murder of St. John the Baptist, and only to be met with
on the morning of the day set apart for him by the
Church. I believe the life of this insect is very ephemeral,
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
but by no means restricted to the twenty-fourth of
June.</q><note place='foot'>Berthold Seeman, <hi rend='italic'>Viti, An Account
of a Government Mission to the
Vitian or Fijian Islands in the years
1860-61</hi> (Cambridge, 1862), p. 63.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mouse-ear
hawkweed
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hieracium
pilosella</foreign>)
gathered
for magical
purposes
at Midsummer.</note>
Yet another plant whose root has been thought to
yield the blood of St. John is the mouse-ear hawkweed
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hieracium pilosella</foreign>), which grows very commonly in dry
exposed places, such as gravelly banks, sunny lawns, and
the tops of park walls. <q>It blossoms from May to the
end of July, presenting its elegant sulphur-coloured flowers
to the noontide sun, while the surrounding herbage, and even
its own foliage, is withered and burnt up</q>;<note place='foot'>James Sowerby, <hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>,
vol. xvi. (London, 1803) p. 1093.</note> and these round
yellow flowers may be likened not inaptly to the disc of the
great luminary whose light they love. At Hildesheim, in
Germany, people used to dig up hawkweed, especially on the
Gallows' Hill, when the clocks were striking noon on
Midsummer Day; and the blood of St. John, which they
found at the roots, was carefully preserved in quills for good
luck. A little of it smeared secretly on the clothes was sure
to make the wearer fortunate in the market that day.<note place='foot'>K. Seifart, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen,
Schwänke und Gebräuche aus Stadt
und Stift Hildesheim</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Hildesheim,
1889), p. 177, § 12.</note>
According to some the plant ought to be dug up with a gold
coin.<note place='foot'>C. L. Rochholz, <hi rend='italic'>Deutscher Glaube
und Brauch</hi> (Berlin, 1867), i. 9.</note> Near Gablonz, in Bohemia, it used to be customary
to make a bed of St. John's flowers, as they were called, on
St. John's Eve, and in the night the saint himself came and
laid his head on the bed; next morning you could see the
print of his head on the flowers, which derived a healing
virtue from his blessed touch, and were mixed with the
fodder of sick cattle to make them whole.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 98, §
681.</note> But whether
these St. John's flowers were the mouse-ear hawkweed or
not is doubtful.<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 100, §
134.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mountain
arnica
gathered
for magical
purposes
at Midsummer.</note>
More commonly in Germany the name of St. John's
flowers (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Johannisblumen</foreign>) appears to be given to the
mountain arnica. In Voigtland the mountain arnica if
plucked on St. John's Eve and stuck in the fields, laid under
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
the roof, or hung on the wall, is believed to protect house
and fields from lightning and hail.<note place='foot'>J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch,
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte
Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande</hi> (Leipsic,
1867), p. 376. The belief and practice
are similar at Grün, near Asch, in
Western Bohemia. See Alois John,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im
deutschen Westböhmen</hi> (Prague, 1905),
p. 84.</note> So in some parts of
Bavaria they think that no thunderstorm can harm a house
which has a blossom of mountain arnica in the window or
the roof, and in the Tyrol the same flower fastened to the
door will render the dwelling fire-proof. But it is needless
to remark that the flower, which takes its popular name
from St. John, will be no protection against either fire or
thunder unless it has been culled on the saint's own day.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi> (Munich, 1848-1855), ii.
299; <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde
des Königreichs Bayern</hi>, iii. (Munich,
1865), p. 342; I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten,
Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler
Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Innsbruck, 1871), p. 160, §
1363.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mugwort
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Artemisia
vulgaris</foreign>)
gathered
for magical
purposes
at Midsummer. Mugwort
in China
and Japan.</note>
Another plant which possesses wondrous virtues, if only
it be gathered on the Eve or the Day of St. John, is
mugwort (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Artemisia vulgaris</foreign>). Hence in France it goes
by the name of the herb of St. John.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
ii. 1013; A. de Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie
des Plantes</hi> (Paris, 1878-1882), i. 189
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Rev. Hilderic Friend, <hi rend='italic'>Flowers and
Flower Lore</hi>, Third Edition (London,
1886), p. 75. In England mugwort is
very common in waste ground, hedges,
and the borders of fields. It flowers
throughout August and later. The root
is woody and perennial. The smooth
stems, three or four feet high, are erect,
branched, and leafy, and marked by
many longitudinal purplish ribs. The
pinnatified leaves alternate on the
stalk; they are smooth and dark green
above, cottony and very white below.
The flowers are in simple leafy spikes
or clusters; the florets are purplish,
furnished with five stamens and five
awl-shaped female flowers, which constitute
the radius. The whole plant
has a weak aromatic scent and a slightly
bitter flavour. Its medical virtues are
of no importance. See James Sowerby,
<hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>, xiv. (London, 1802)
p. 978. Altogether it is not easy to
see why such an inconspicuous and insignificant
flower should play so large
a part in popular superstition. Mugwort
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Artemisia vulgaris</foreign>) is not to be
confounded with wormwood (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Artemisia
absinthium</foreign>), which is quite a different
flower in appearance, though it belongs
to the same genus. Wormwood is
common in England, flowering about
August. The flowers are in clusters,
each of them broad, hemispherical, and
drooping, with a buff-coloured disc.
The whole plant is of a pale whitish
green and clothed with a short silky
down. It is remarkable for its intense
bitterness united to a peculiar strong
aromatic odour. It is often used to
keep insects from clothes and furniture,
and as a medicine is one of the most
active bitters. See James Sowerby,
<hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>, vol. xviii. (London,
1804) p. 1230.</note> Near Péronne, in the
French department of Somme, people used to go out fasting
before sunrise on St. John's Day to cull the plant; put
among the wheat in the barn it protected the corn against
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
mice. In Artois people carried bunches of mugwort, or wore
it round their body;<note place='foot'>Breuil, <q>Du culte de St.-Jean-Baptiste,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Société des
Antiquaires de Picardie</hi>, viii. (1845)
p. 224, note 1, quoting the curé of
Manancourt, near Péronne.</note> in Poitou they still wear girdles of
mugwort or hemp when they warm their backs at the midsummer
fire as a preservative against backache at harvest;<note place='foot'>L. Pineau, <hi rend='italic'>Le folk-lore du Poitou</hi>
(Paris, 1892), p. 499.</note>
and the custom of wearing girdles of mugwort on the Eve
or Day of St. John has caused the plant to be popularly
known in Germany and Bohemia as St. John's girdle. In
Bohemia such girdles are believed to protect the wearer for
the whole year against ghosts, magic, misfortune, and sickness.
People also weave garlands of the plant and look
through them at the midsummer bonfire or put them on their
heads; and by doing so they ensure that their heads will
not ache nor their eyes smart all that year. Another
Bohemian practice is to make a decoction of mugwort which
has been gathered on St. John's Day; then, when your cow
is bewitched and will yield no milk, you have only to wash
the animal thrice with the decoction and the spell will be
broken.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), pp. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
§§ 635-637.</note> In Germany, people used to crown their heads or
gird their bodies with mugwort, which they afterwards threw
into the midsummer bonfire, pronouncing certain rhymes
and believing that they thus rid themselves of all their ill-luck.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, i. p. 249, § 283; J.
Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 1013;
I. V. Zingerle, in <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>,
i. (1853) p. 331. and <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> iv. (1859)
p. 42 (quoting a work of the seventeenth
century); F. J. Vonbun, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge
zur deutschen Mythologie</hi> (Chur, 1862),
p. 133, note 1. See also above, vol. i.
pp. 162, 163, 165, 174, 177.</note>
Sometimes wreaths or girdles of mugwort were kept
in houses, cattle-sheds, and sheep-folds throughout the year.<note place='foot'>A. de Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie der
Plantes</hi> (Paris, 1878-1882), i. 190,
quoting Du Cange.</note>
In Normandy such wreaths are a protection against thunder
and thieves;<note place='foot'>A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes et
Traditions des Provinces de France</hi>
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 262.</note> and stalks of mugwort hinder witches from
laying their spells on the butter.<note place='foot'>Jules Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage
Normand</hi> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1886),
ii. 8.</note> In the Isle of Man on
Midsummer Eve people gathered <foreign lang='gv' rend='italic'>barran fealoin</foreign> or mugwort
<q>as a preventive against the influence of witchcraft</q>;<note place='foot'>Joseph Train, <hi rend='italic'>Historical and Statistical
Account of the Isle of Man</hi> (Douglas,
Isle of Man, 1845), ii. 120.</note> in
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
Belgium bunches of mugwort gathered on St. John's Day or
Eve and hung on the doors of stables and houses are believed
to bring good luck and to furnish a protection against
sorcery.<note place='foot'>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Calendrier Belge</hi> (Brussels, 1861-1862),
i. 422.</note> It is curious to find that in China a similar use is,
or was formerly, made of mugwort at the same season of the
year. In an old Chinese calendar we read that <q>on the
fifth day of the fifth month the four classes of the people
gambol in the herbage, and have competitive games with
plants of all kinds. They pluck mugwort and make dolls
of it, which they suspend over their gates and doors,
in order to expel poisonous airs or influences.</q><note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, vi. (Leyden, 1910)
p. 1079, compare p. 947.</note> On this
custom Professor J. J. M. de Groot observes: <q>Notice
that the plant owed its efficacy to the time when it
was plucked: a day denoting the midsummer festival,
when light and fire of the universe are in their
apogee.</q><note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> vi. 947.</note> On account of this valuable property mugwort
is used by Chinese surgeons in cautery.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> vi. 946 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Ainos of
Japan employ bunches of mugwort in exorcisms, <q>because
it is thought that demons of disease dislike the smell and
flavour of this herb.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. John Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu
and their Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1901), p.
318, compare pp. 315 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 329, 370,
372.</note> It is an old German belief that he
who carries mugwort in his shoes will not grow weary.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie
und Sittenkunde</hi>, iv. (1859) p. 42;
Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfeste</hi>,
p. 141. The German name of mugwort
(<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Beifuss</foreign>) is said to be derived
from this superstition.</note> In
Mecklenburg, they say that if you will dig up a plant of
mugwort at noon on Midsummer Day, you will find under
the root a burning coal, which vanishes away as soon as the
church bells have ceased to ring. If you find the coal and
carry it off in silence, it will prove a remedy for all sorts of
maladies.<note place='foot'>K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen, und
Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</hi> (Vienna,
1879-1880), ii. 290, § 1445.</note> According to another German superstition, such
a coal will turn to gold.<note place='foot'>Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfeste</hi>,
p. 141.</note> English writers record the popular
belief that a rare coal is to be found under the root of mugwort
at a single hour of a single day in the year, namely, at
noon or midnight on Midsummer Eve, and that this coal will
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
protect him who carries it on his person from plague, carbuncle,
lightning, fever, and ague.<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of
Great Britain</hi> (London, 1882-1883),
i. 334 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, quoting Lupton, Thomas
Hill, and Paul Barbette. A precisely
similar belief is recorded with regard
to wormwood (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>armoise</foreign>) by the French
writer J. B. Thiers, who adds that
only small children and virgins could
find the wonderful coal. See J. B.
Thiers, <hi rend='italic'>Traité des Superstitions</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi> (Paris,
1741), i. 300. In Annam people think
that wormwood puts demons to flight;
hence they hang up bunches of its
leaves in their houses at the New Year.
See Paul Giran, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et Religion
Annamites</hi> (Paris, 1912), p. 118,
compare pp. 185, 256.</note> In Eastern Prussia, on
St. John's Eve, people can foretell a marriage by means of
mugwort; they bend two stalks of the growing plant outward,
and then observe whether the stalks, after straightening
themselves again, incline towards each other or not.<note place='foot'>C. Lemke, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches in Ostpreussen</hi>
(Mohrungen, 1884-1887), i.
21. As to mugwort (German <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Beifuss</foreign>,
French <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>armoise</foreign>), see further A. de
Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie des Plantes</hi>, ii.
16 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
iii. 356 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Orpine
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sedum
telephium</foreign>)
used in
divination
at Midsummer.</note>
A similar mode of divination has been practised both in
England and in Germany with the orpine (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sedum telephium</foreign>),
a plant which grows on a gravelly or chalky soil about
hedges, the borders of fields, and on bushy hills. It flowers
in August, and the blossoms consist of dense clustered tufts
of crimson or purple petals; sometimes, but rarely, the
flowers are white.<note place='foot'>James Sowerby, <hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>,
vol. xix. (London, 1804) p. 1319.</note> In England the plant is popularly
known as Midsummer Men, because people used to plant
slips of them in pairs on Midsummer Eve, one slip standing
for a young man and the other for a young woman. If the
plants, as they grew up, bent towards each other, the couple
would marry; if either of them withered, he or she whom it
represented would die.<note place='foot'>John Aubrey, <hi rend='italic'>Remains of Gentilisme
and Judaisme</hi> (London, 1881), pp.
25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities
of Great Britain</hi> (London, 1882-1883),
i. 329 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Rev. Hilderic Friend,
<hi rend='italic'>Flowers and Flower Lore</hi>, Third Edition
(London, 1886), p. 136; D. H.
Moutray Read, <q>Hampshire Folk-lore,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xxii. (1911) p. 325.
Compare J. Sowerby, <hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>,
vol. xix. (London, 1804), p. 1319:
<q>Like all succulent plants this is very
tenacious of life, and will keep growing
long after it has been torn from its
native spot. The country people in
Norfolk sometimes hang it up in their
cottages, judging by its vigour of the
health of some absent friend.</q> It
seems that in England the course of
love has sometimes been divined by
means of sprigs of red sage placed in a
basin of rose-water on Midsummer Eve
(J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 333).</note> In Masuren, Westphalia, and Switzerland
the method of forecasting the future by means of the
orpine is precisely the same.<note place='foot'>M. Töppen, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben aus
Masuren</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Danzig, 1867), pp. 71 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche und
Märchen aus Westfalen</hi> (Leipsic, 1859),
ii. 176, § 487; E. Hoffmann-Krayer,
<hi rend='italic'>Feste und Bräuche des Schweizervolkes</hi>
(Zurich, 1913), p. 163. In Switzerland
the species employed for this purpose
on Midsummer day is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sedum reflexum</foreign>.
The custom is reported from the
Emmenthal. In Germany a root of
orpine, dug up on St. John's morning
and hung between the shoulders,
is sometimes thought to be a cure for
hemorrhoids (Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen
Volksfeste</hi>, p. 145). Perhaps the <q>oblong,
tapering, fleshy, white lumps</q> of
the roots (J. Sowerby, <hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>,
vol. xix. London, 1804, p. 1319) are
thought to bear some likeness to the
hemorrhoids, and to heal them on
the principle that the remedy should
resemble the disease.</note>
</p>

<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Vervain
gathered
for magical
purposes
at Midsummer.
Magical
virtue of
four-leaved
clover
on Midsummer
Eve.</note>
Another plant which popular superstition has often
associated with the summer solstice is vervain.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 162, 163,
165. In England vervain (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Verbena
officinalis</foreign>) grows not uncommonly by
road sides, in dry sunny pastures, and
in waste places about villages. It
flowers in July. The flowers are small
and sessile, the corolla of a very pale
lilac hue, its tube enclosing the four
short curved stamens. The root of
the plant, worn by a string round the
neck, is an old superstitious medicine
for scrofulous disorders. See James
Sowerby, <hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>, vol. xi.
(London, 1800) p. 767.</note> In some
parts of Spain people gather vervain after sunset on Midsummer
Eve, and wash their faces next morning in the
water in which the plants have been allowed to steep overnight.<note place='foot'>Dr. Otero Acevado, in <hi rend='italic'>Le Temps</hi>,
September 1898. See above, vol. i.
p. 208, note 1.</note>
In Belgium vervain is gathered on St. John's Day
and worn as a safeguard against rupture.<note place='foot'>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Calendrier Belge</hi> (Brussels, 1861-1862),
i. 422.</note> In Normandy
the peasants cull vervain on the Day or the Eve of St. John,
believing that, besides its medical properties, it possesses at
this season the power of protecting the house from thunder
and lightning, from sorcerers, demons, and thieves.<note place='foot'>A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes et
Traditions des Provinces de France</hi>, p.
262; Amélie Bosquet, <hi rend='italic'>La Normandie
romanesque et merveilleuse</hi>, p. 294;
J. Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage Normand</hi>,
i. 287, ii. 8. In Saintonge and
Aunis the plant was gathered on Midsummer
Eve for the purpose of evoking
or exorcising spirits (J. L. M. Noguès,
<hi rend='italic'>Les mœurs d'autrefois en Saintonge et
en Aunis</hi>, p. 72).</note> Bohemian
poachers wash their guns with a decoction of vervain and
southernwood, which they have gathered naked before sunrise
on Midsummer Day; guns which have been thus treated
never miss the mark.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>,
p. 207, § 1437.</note> In our own country vervain used to
be sought for its magical virtues on Midsummer Eve.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche und
Märchen aus Westfalen</hi> (Leipsic, 1859),
ii. 177, citing Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh
Journal</hi>, 2nd July 1842.</note> In
the Tyrol they think that he who finds a four-leaved clover
while the vesper-bell is ringing on Midsummer Eve can work
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
magic from that time forth.<note place='foot'>I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Innsbruck, 1871), p. 107, § 919.</note> People in Berry say that the
four-leaved clover is endowed with all its marvellous virtues
only when it has been plucked by a virgin on the night of
Midsummer Eve.<note place='foot'>Laisnel de la Salle, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances et
Légendes du Centre de la France</hi> (Paris,
1875), i. 288.</note> In Saintonge and Aunis the four-leaved
clover, if it be found on the Eve of St. John, brings good
luck at play;<note place='foot'>J. L. M. Noguès, <hi rend='italic'>Les mœurs
d'autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis</hi>,
pp. 71 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> in Belgium it brings a girl a husband.<note place='foot'>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Calendrier Belge</hi>, i. 423.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Camomile
gathered
for magical
purposes
at Midsummer.</note>
At Kirchvers, in Hesse, people run out to the fields at
noon on Midsummer Day to gather camomile; for the
flowers, plucked at the moment when the sun is at the
highest point of his course, are supposed to possess the
medicinal qualities of the plant in the highest degree. In
heathen times the camomile flower, with its healing qualities,
its yellow calix and white stamens, is said to have been
sacred to the kindly and shining Balder and to have borne
his name, being called <hi rend='italic'>Balders-brâ</hi>, that is, Balder's eyelashes.<note place='foot'>W. Kolbe, <hi rend='italic'>Hessische Volks-Sitten
und Gebräuche</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Marburg, 1888), p.
72; Sophus Bugge, <hi rend='italic'>Studien über die
Entstehung der nordischen Götter- und
Heldensagen</hi> (Munich, 1889), pp. 35,
295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Fr. Kauffmann, <hi rend='italic'>Balder</hi> (Strasburg,
1902), pp. 45, 61. The flowers
of common camomile (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Anthemis nobilis</foreign>)
are white with a yellow disk, which in
time becomes conical. The whole
plant is intensely bitter, with a peculiar
but agreeable smell. As a medicine
it is useful for stomachic troubles. In
England it does not generally grow
wild. See James Sowerby, <hi rend='italic'>English
Botany</hi>, vol. xiv. (London, 1802) p.
980.</note>
In Westphalia, also, the belief prevails that camomile
is most potent as a drug when it has been gathered on
Midsummer Day;<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche und
Märchen aus Westfalen</hi> (Leipsic, 1859),
ii. 177, § 488.</note> in Masuren the plant must always be
one of the nine different kinds of plants that are culled on
Midsummer Eve to form wreaths, and tea brewed from the
flower is a remedy for many sorts of maladies.<note place='foot'>M. Töppen, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben aus Masuren</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Danzig, 1867), p. 71.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mullein
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Verbascum</foreign>)
gathered
for magical
purposes
at Midsummer.</note>
Thuringian peasants hold that if the root of the yellow
mullein (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Verbascum</foreign>) has been dug up in silence with a ducat at
midnight on Midsummer Eve, and is worn in a piece of linen
next to the skin, it will preserve the wearer from epilepsy.<note place='foot'>A. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), p. 289, § 139.</note>
In Prussia girls go out into the fields on Midsummer Day,
gather mullein, and hang it up over their beds. The girl
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
whose flower is the first to wither will be the first to die.<note place='foot'>W. J. A. von Tettau und J. D.
H. Temme, <hi rend='italic'>Volkssagen Ostpreussens,
Litthauens und Westpreussens</hi> (Berlin,
1837), p. 283.</note>
Perhaps the bright yellow flowers of mullein, clustering
round the stem like lighted candles, may partly account for
the association of the plant with the summer solstice. In
Germany great mullein (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Verbascum thapsus</foreign>) is called the
King's Candle; in England it is popularly known as High
Taper. The yellow, hoary mullein (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Verbascum pulverulentum</foreign>)
<q>forms a golden pyramid a yard high, of many hundreds of
flowers, and is one of the most magnificent of British herbaceous
plants.</q><note place='foot'>James Sowerby, <hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>,
vol. vii. (London, 1798), p. 487. As
to great mullein or high taper, see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
vol. viii. (London, 1799), p. 549.</note> We may trace a relation between mullein
and the sun in the Prussian custom of bending the flower,
after sunset, towards the point where the sun will rise, and
praying at the same time that a sick person or a sick beast
may be restored to health.<note place='foot'>Tettau und Temme, <hi rend='italic'>loc. cit.</hi> As
to mullein at Midsummer, see also
above, vol. i. pp. 190, 191.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Seeds of
fir-cones,
wild
thyme,
elder-flowers,
and purple
loosestrife
gathered
for magical
purposes
at Midsummer.</note>
In Bohemia poachers fancy that they can render themselves
invulnerable by swallowing the seed from a fir-cone
which they have found growing upwards before sunrise on
the morning of St. John's Day.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>,
p. 205, § 1426.</note> Again, wild thyme
gathered on Midsummer Day is used in Bohemia to
fumigate the trees on Christmas Eve in order that they
may grow well;<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 93,
§ 648.</note> in Voigtland a tea brewed from wild
thyme which has been pulled at noon on Midsummer
Day is given to women in childbed.<note place='foot'>J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch,
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte
Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande</hi> (Leipsic,
1867), p. 377.</note> The Germans of
Western Bohemia brew a tea or wine from elder-flowers,
but they say that the brew has no medicinal virtue unless
the flowers have been gathered on Midsummer Eve. They
do say, too, that whenever you see an elder-tree, you should
take off your hat.<note place='foot'>Alois John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), p. 84.</note> In the Tyrol dwarf-elder serves to detect
witchcraft in cattle, provided of course that the shrub has
been pulled up or the branches broken on Midsummer Day.<note place='foot'>J. N. Ritter von Alpenburg,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythen und Sagen Tirols</hi> (Zurich,
1857), p. 397.</note>
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
Russian peasants regard the plant known as purple loosestrife
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Lythrum salicaria</foreign>) with respect and even fear. Wizards make
much use of it. They dig the root up on St. John's morning,
at break of day, without the use of iron tools; and they
believe that by means of the root, as well as of the blossom,
they can subdue evil spirits and make them serviceable, and
also drive away witches and the demons that guard treasures.<note place='foot'>C. Russwurm, <q>Aberglaube aus
Russland,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche
Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>, iv. (1859)
pp. 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The purple loosestrife is
one of our most showy English wild
plants. In July and August it may be
seen flowering on the banks of rivers,
ponds, and ditches. The separate
flowers are in axillary whorls, which
together form a loose spike of a reddish
variable purple. See James
Sowerby, <hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>, vol. xv.
(London, 1802) p. 1061.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Magical
properties
attributed
to fern seed
at Midsummer.</note>
More famous, however, than these are the marvellous
properties which popular superstition in many parts of
Europe has attributed to the fern at this season. At
midnight on Midsummer Eve the plant is supposed to
bloom and soon afterwards to seed; and whoever catches
the bloom or the seed is thereby endowed with supernatural
knowledge and miraculous powers; above all, he knows
where treasures lie hidden in the ground, and he can render
himself invisible at will by putting the seed in his shoe.
But great precautions must be observed in procuring the
wondrous bloom or seed, which else quickly vanishes like
dew on sand or mist in the air. The seeker must neither
touch it with his hand nor let it touch the ground; he
spreads a white cloth under the plant, and the blossom or
the seed falls into it. Beliefs of this sort concerning fern-seed
have prevailed, with trifling variations of detail, in
England, France, Germany, Austria, Italy, and Russia.<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, i.
314 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Hilderic Friend, <hi rend='italic'>Flowers
and Flower Lore</hi>, Third Edition (London,
1886), pp. 60, 78, 150, 279-283;
Miss C. S. Burne and Miss G. F.
Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi> (London,
1883), p. 242; Marie Trevelyan,
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</hi>
(London, 1909), pp. 89 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. B.
Thiers, <hi rend='italic'>Traité des Superstitions</hi> (Paris,
1679), p. 314; J. Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses
du Bocage Normand</hi>, i. 290; P.
Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes populaires de la
Haute-Bretagne</hi> (Paris, 1886), p. 217;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions et Superstitions de la
Haute-Bretagne</hi> (Paris, 1882), ii. 336;
A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), pp. 94
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 123; F. J. Vonbun, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge
zur deutschen Mythologie</hi> (Chur,
1862), pp. 133 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die
deutschen Volksfesten</hi>, p. 144; K.
Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche
aus Mecklenburg</hi>, ii. 288,
§ 1437; M. Töppen, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben
aus Masuren</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 72; A. Schlossar,
<q>Volksmeinung und Volksaberglaube
aus der deutschen Steiermark,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>,
N.R., xxiv. (1891) p. 387;
Theodor Vernaleken, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und
Bräuche des Volkes in Oesterreich</hi>
(Vienna, 1859), p. 309; J. N. Ritter
von Alpenburg, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und Sagen
Tirols</hi> (Zurich, 1857), pp. 407 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche und
Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Innsbruck,
1871), p. 103, § 882, p. 158,
§ 1350; Christian Schneller, <hi rend='italic'>Märchen
und Sagen aus Wälschtirol</hi> (Innsbruck,
1867), p. 237; J. V. Grohmann,
<hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen
und Mähren</hi>, p. 97, §§ 673-677;
Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalendar
aus Böhmen</hi> (Prague, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 311
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Volkskunde
der Deutschen in Mähren</hi>
(Vienna and Olmutz, 1893), p. 265;
R. F. Kaindl, <hi rend='italic'>Die Huzulen</hi> (Vienna,
1894), p. 106; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Zauberglaube
bei den Huzulen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxvi.
(1899) p. 275; P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte,
Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi>
(Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 142, § 159;
G. Finamore, <hi rend='italic'>Credenze, Usi e Costumi
Abruzzesi</hi> (Palermo, 1890), p. 161;
C. Russwurm, <q>Aberglaube in Russland,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie
und Sittenkunde</hi>, iv. (1859) pp.
152 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. de Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie
des Plantes</hi> (Paris, 1878-1882), ii. 144
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The practice of gathering ferns
or fern seed on the Eve of St. John was
forbidden by the synod of Ferrara in
1612. See J. B. Thiers, <hi rend='italic'>Traité des
Superstitions</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi> (Paris, 1741), i. 299
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In a South Slavonian story we
read how a cowherd understood the
language of animals, because fern-seed
accidentally fell into his shoe on Midsummer
Day (F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen und
Märchen der Südslaven</hi>, Leipsic, 1883-1884,
ii. 424 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, No. 159). On
this subject I may refer to my article,
<q>The Language of Animals,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The
Archaeological Review</hi>, i. (1888) pp.
164 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
Bohemia the magic bloom is said to be golden, and to glow
or sparkle like fire.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 97,
§§ 673, 675.</note> In Russia, they say that at dead of
night on Midsummer Eve the plant puts forth buds like
glowing coals, which on the stroke of twelve burst open
with a clap like thunder and light up everything near and
far.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie
und Sittenkunde</hi>, iv. (1859) pp. 152
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. de Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie des
Plantes</hi>, ii. 146.</note> In the Azores they say that the fern only blooms at
midnight on St. John's Eve, and that no one ever sees the
flower because the fairies instantly carry it off. But if any
one, watching till it opens, throws a cloth over it, and then,
when the magic hour has passed, burns the blossoms carefully,
the ashes will serve as a mirror in which you can read
the fate of absent friends; if your friends are well and
happy, the ashes will resume the shape of a lovely flower;
but if they are unhappy or dead, the ashes will remain cold
and lifeless.<note place='foot'>M. Longworth Dames and E. Seemann,
<q>Folk-lore of the Azores,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xiv. (1903) pp. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Thuringia people think that he who has
on his person or in his house the male fern (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Aspidium filix
mas</foreign>) cannot be bewitched. They call it St. John's root
(<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Johanniswurzel</foreign>), and say that it blooms thrice in the year,
on Christmas Eve, Easter Eve, and the day of St. John the
Baptist; it should be dug up when the sun enters the sign
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
of the lion. Armed with this powerful implement you can
detect a sorcerer at any gathering, it may be a wedding
feast or what not. All you have to do is to put the root
under the tablecloth unseen by the rest of the company,
and, if there should be a sorcerer among them, he will turn
as pale as death and get up and go away. Fear and horror
come over him when the fern-root is under the tablecloth.
And when oxen, horses, or other domestic cattle are bewitched
by wicked people, you need only take the root
at full moon, soak it in water, and sprinkle the cattle with
the water, or rub them down with a cloth that has been
steeped in it, and witchcraft will have no more power over
the animals.<note place='foot'>August Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), p. 275, § 82.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Branches
of hazel cut
at Midsummer
to
serve as
divining-rods.</note>
Once more, people have fancied that if they cut a branch
of hazel on Midsummer Eve it would serve them as a divining
rod to discover treasures and water. This belief has
existed in Moravia, Mecklenburg, and apparently in Scotland.<note place='foot'>W. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Volkskunde
der Deutschen in Mähren</hi> (Vienna
and Olmutz, 1893), p. 265; K. Bartsch,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus
Mecklenburg</hi>, ii. p. 285, § 1431, p.
288, § 1439; J. Napier, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore, or
Superstitious Beliefs in the West of
Scotland</hi> (Paisley, 1879), p. 125.</note>
In the Mark of Brandenburg, they say that if you
would procure the mystic wand you must go to the hazel
by night on Midsummer Eve, walking backwards, and when
you have come to the bush you must silently put your
hands between your legs and cut a fork-shaped stick; that
stick will be the divining-rod, and, as such, will detect
treasures buried in the ground. If you have any doubt
as to the quality of the wand, you have only to hold it in
water; for in that case your true divining-rod will squeak
like a pig, but your spurious one will not.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi> (Berlin, 1843), p. 330. As
to the divining-rod in general, see A.
Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herabkunft des Feuers und
des Göttertranks</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Gütersloh, 1886),
pp. 181 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 813 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; S. Baring-Gould,
<hi rend='italic'>Curious Myths of the Middle
Ages</hi> (London, 1884), pp. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
Kuhn plausibly suggests that the forked
shape of the divining-rod is a rude
representation of the human form. He
compares the shape and magic properties
of mandragora.</note> In Bavaria they
say that the divining-rod should be cut from a hazel bush
between eleven and twelve on St. John's Night, and that by
means of it you can discover not only veins of metal and
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
underground springs, but also thieves and murderers and
unknown ways. In cutting it you should say, <q>God greet
thee, thou noble twig! With God the Father I seek thee,
with God the Son I find thee, with the might of God the
Holy Ghost I break thee. I adjure thee, rod and sprig, by
the power of the Highest that thou shew me what I order,
and that as sure and clear as Mary the Mother of God was
a pure virgin when she bare our Lord Jesus, in the name of
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,
Amen!</q><note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi> (Munich, 1848-1855), i.
296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Berlin and the neighbourhood they say that
every seventh year there grows a wonderful branch on a
hazel bush, and that branch is the divining-rod. Only an
innocent child, born on a Sunday and nursed in the true
faith, can find it on St. John's Night; to him then all the
treasures of the earth lie open.<note place='foot'>E. Krause, <q>Abergläubische
Kuren und sonstiger Aberglaube in
Berlin und nächster Umgebung,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, xv. (1883) p.
89.</note> In the Tyrol the divining-rod
ought to be cut at new moon, but may be cut either on
St. John's Day or on Twelfth Night. Having got it you
baptize it in the name of one of the Three Holy Kings
according to the purpose for which you intend to use it: if
the rod is to discover gold, you name it Caspar; if it is to
reveal silver, you call it Balthasar; and if it is to point out
hidden springs of water, you dub it Melchior.<note place='foot'>J. N. Ritter von Alpenburg,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythen und Sagen Tirols</hi> (Zurich,
1857), p. 393.</note> In Lechrain
the divining-rod is a yearling shoot of hazel with two
branches; a good time for cutting it is new moon, and if
the sun is rising, so much the better. As for the day of
the year, you may take your choice between St. John's
Day, Twelfth Night, and Shrove Tuesday. If cut with
the proper form of words, the rod will as usual discover
underground springs and hidden treasures.<note place='foot'>Karl Freiherr von Leoprechting,
<hi rend='italic'>Aus dem Lechrain</hi> (Munich, 1855),
p. 98. Some people in Swabia say
that the hazel branch which is to
serve as a divining-rod should be cut
at midnight on Good Friday, and
that it should be laid on the altar
and mass said over it. If that is
done, we are told that a Protestant
can use it to quite as good effect as a
Catholic. See E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus
Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart, 1852), pp. 244
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, No. 268. Some of the Wends of
the Spreewald agree that the divining-rod
should be made of hazel-wood,
and they say that it ought to
be wrapt in swaddling-bands, laid on
a white plate, and baptized on Easter
Saturday. Many of them, however,
think that it should be made of <q>yellow
willow.</q> See Wilibald von
Schulenburg, <hi rend='italic'>Wendische Volkssagen
und Gebräuche aus dem Spreewald</hi>
(Leipsic, 1880), pp. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> A remarkable
property of the hazel in the
opinion of Bavarian peasants is that it
is never struck by lightning; this immunity
it has enjoyed ever since the
day when it protected the Mother of
God against a thunderstorm on her
flight into Egypt. See <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes-
und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</hi>,
i. (Munich, 1860) p. 371.</note>
</p>

<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The divining-rod
in
Sweden
obtained
on Midsummer
Eve.</note>
Midsummer Eve is also the favourite time for procuring
the divining-rod in Sweden. Some say that it should then
be cut from a mistletoe bough.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
iii. 289, referring to Dybeck's <hi rend='italic'>Runa</hi>,
1844, p. 22, and 1845, p. 80.</note> However, other people in
Sweden are of opinion that the divining-rod (<foreign lang='sv' rend='italic'>Slag ruta</foreign>)
which is obtained on Midsummer Eve ought to be compounded
out of four different kinds of wood, to wit, mistletoe,
mountain-ash, the aspen, and another; and they say
that the mountain-ash which is employed for this purpose
should, like the mistletoe, be a parasite growing from the
hollow root of a fallen tree, whither the seed was carried by
a bird or wafted by the wind. Armed with this fourfold
implement of power the treasure-seeker proceeds at sundown
to the spot where he expects to find hidden wealth; there
he lays the rod on the ground in perfect silence, and when
it lies directly over treasure, it will begin to hop about as if
it were alive.<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>
(London, 1870), pp. 266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
mythical
springwort
supposed
to bloom
on Midsummer
Eve.</note>
A mystical plant which to some extent serves the same
purpose as the divining-rod is the springwort, which is sometimes
supposed to be caper-spurge (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Euphorbia lathyris</foreign>). In
the Harz Mountains they say that many years ago there
was a wondrous flower called springwort or Johnswort, which
was as rare as it was marvellous. It bloomed only on St.
John's Night (some say under a fern) between the hours of
eleven and twelve; but when the last stroke of twelve was
struck, the flower vanished away. Only in mountainous
regions, where many noble metals reposed in the bosom of
the earth, was the flower seen now and then in lonely
meadows among the hills. The spirits of the hills wished
by means of it to shew to men where their treasures were to
be found. The flower itself was yellow and shone like a
lamp in the darkness of night. It never stood still, but kept
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
hopping constantly to and fro. It was also afraid of men and
fled before them, and no man ever yet plucked it unless he
had been set apart by Providence for the task. To him
who was lucky enough to cull it the flower revealed all
the treasures of the earth, and it made him rich, oh so rich
and so happy!<note place='foot'>Heinrich Pröhle, <hi rend='italic'>Harzsagen</hi> (Leipsic,
1859), i. 99, No. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Another
way of
catching
the springwort. The white
bloom of
chicory.</note>
However, the usual account given of the springwort is
somewhat different. They say that the way to procure it is
this. You mark a hollow in a tree where a green or black
woodpecker has built its nest and hatched its young; you
plug up the hole with a wooden wedge; then you hide
behind the tree and wait. The woodpecker meantime has
flown away but very soon returns with the springwort in its
bill. It flutters up to the tree-trunk holding the springwort
to the wedge, which at once, as if struck by a hammer, jumps
out with a bang. Now is your chance. You rush from
your concealment, you raise a loud cry, and in its fright the
bird opens its bill and drops the springwort. Quick as
thought you reach out a red or white cloth, with which you
have taken care to provide yourself, and catch the magic
flower as it falls. The treasure is now yours. Before its
marvellous power all doors and locks fly open; it can make
the bearer of it invisible; and neither steel nor lead can
wound the man who carries it in the right-hand pocket of
his coat. That is why people in Swabia say of a thief who
cannot be caught, <q>He must surely have a springwort.</q><note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
ii. 812 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, iii. 289; A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Gütersloh, 1886), pp. 188-193;
Walter K. Kelly, <hi rend='italic'>Curiosities of
Indo-European Tradition and Folk-lore</hi>
(London, 1863), pp. 174-178; J.
F. L. Woeste, <hi rend='italic'>Volksüberlieferungen in
der Grafschaft Mark</hi> (Iserlohn, 1848),
p. 44; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz,
<hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</hi>
(Leipsic, 1848), p. 459, No.
444; Ernst Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen,
Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>
(Stuttgart, 1852), pp. 240 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, No.
265; C. Russwurm, <q>Aberglaube in
Russland,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche
Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>, iv. (Göttingen,
1859) p. 153; J. V. Grohmann,
<hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus
Böhmen und Mähren</hi> (Prague and
Leipsic, 1864), p. 88, No. 623; Paul
Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube
in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
ii. 207 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In Swabia some
people say that the bird which brings
the springwort is not the woodpecker
but the hoopoe (E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 240). Others associate the springwort
with other birds. See H. Pröhle,
<hi rend='italic'>Harzsagen</hi> (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 116, No.
308; A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herabkunft des
Feuers</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 190. It is from its power
of springing or bursting open all doors
and locks that the springwort derives
its name (German <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Springwurzel</foreign>).</note>
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
The superstition which associates the springwort with the
woodpecker is very ancient, for it is recorded by Pliny. It
was a vulgar belief, he tells us, that if a shepherd plugged
up a woodpecker's nest in the hollow of a tree with a
wedge, the bird would bring a herb which caused the wedge
to slip out of the hole; Trebius indeed affirmed that the
wedge leaped out with a bang, however hard and fast you
might have driven it into the tree.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> x. 40.</note> Another flower which
possesses the same remarkable power of bursting open all
doors and locks is chicory, provided always that you cut
the flower with a piece of gold at noon or midnight on St.
James's Day, the twenty-fifth of July. But in cutting it
you must be perfectly silent; if you utter a sound, it is all
up with you. There was a man who was just about to cut
the flower of the chicory, when he looked up and saw a
millstone hovering over his head. He fled for his life and
fortunately escaped; but had he so much as opened his lips,
the millstone would have dropped on him and crushed him
as flat as a pancake. However, it is only a rare white
variety of the chicory flower which can act as a picklock;
the common bright blue flower is perfectly useless for the
purpose.<note place='foot'>Ernst Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart,
1852), pp. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, No. 264.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
magical
virtues
ascribed
to plants
at Midsummer
may be
thought to
be derived
from the
sun, then
at the
height of
his power
and glory. Hence it
is possible
that the
Midsummer
bonfires
stand in
direct
relation to
the sun.</note>
Many more examples might perhaps be cited of the
marvellous virtues which certain plants have been supposed
to acquire at the summer solstice, but the foregoing instances
may suffice to prove that the superstition is widely spread,
deeply rooted, and therefore probably very ancient in Europe.
Why should plants be thought to be endowed with these
wonderful properties on the longest day more than on any other
day of the year? It seems difficult or impossible to explain
such a belief except on the supposition that in some mystic
way the plants catch from the sun, then at the full height of
his power and glory, some fleeting effluence of radiant light
and heat, which invests them for a time with powers above
the ordinary for the healing of diseases and the unmasking
and baffling of all the evil things that threaten the life of man.
That the supposition is not purely hypothetical will appear
from a folk-tale, to be noticed later on, in which the magic
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
bloom of the fern is directly derived from the sun at noon on
Midsummer Day. And if the magic flowers of Midsummer
Eve thus stand in direct relation to the sun, which many of
them resemble in shape and colour, blooming in the meadows
like little yellow suns fallen from the blue sky, does it
not become probable that the bonfires kindled at the
same time are the artificial, as the flowers are the natural,
imitations of the great celestial fire then blazing in all its
strength? At least analogy seems to favour the inference and
so far to support Mannhardt's theory, that the bonfires kindled
at the popular festivals of Europe, especially at the summer
solstice, are intended to reinforce the waning or waxing fires
of the sun. Thus if in our enquiry into these fire-festivals
the scales of judgment are loaded with the adverse theories of
Mannhardt and Westermarck, we may say that the weight,
light as it is, of the magic flowers of Midsummer Eve seems to
incline the trembling balance back to the side of Mannhardt.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>This consideration
tends to
bring us
back to
an intermediate
position
between
the rival
theories of
Mannhardt
and
Westermarck.</note>
Nor is it, perhaps, an argument against Mannhardt's view
that the midsummer flowers and plants are so often employed
as talismans to break the spells of witchcraft.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>.</note> For granted
that employment, which is undeniable, we have still to
explain it, and that we can hardly do except by reference to
the midsummer sun. And what is here said of the midsummer
flowers applies equally to the midsummer bonfires.
They too are used to destroy the charms of witches and warlocks;
but if they can do so, may it not be in part because
fires at midsummer are thought to burn with fiercer fury than
at other times by sympathy with the fiercer fervour of the
sun? This consideration would bring us back to an intermediate
position between the opposing theories, namely, to
the view that while the purely destructive aspect of fire is
generally the most prominent and apparently the most important
at these festivals, we must not overlook the additional
force which by virtue of homoeopathic or imitative magic the
bonfires may be supposed both to derive from and to impart
to the sun, especially at the moment of the summer solstice
when his strength is greatest and begins to decline, and when
accordingly he can at once give and receive help to the
greatest advantage.
</p>

<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Miscellaneous
examples
of the
baleful
activity
of witches
at Midsummer
and of the
precautions
which it is
necessary
to take
against
them at
that time.
Witches
in Voigtland. The
witches'
Sabbath in
Prussia on
Walpurgis
Night and
Midsummer
Eve.
Midsummer
Eve a
witching
time
among the
South
Slavs.</note>
To conclude this part of our subject it may not be amiss
to illustrate by a few more miscellaneous examples the belief
that Midsummer Eve is one of the great days of the year in
which witches and warlocks pursue their nefarious calling;
indeed in this respect Midsummer Eve perhaps stands second
only to the famous Walpurgis Night (the Eve of May Day).
For instance, in the neighbourhood of Lierre, in Belgium, the
people think that on the night of Midsummer Eve all witches
and warlocks must repair to a certain field which is indicated
to them beforehand. There they hold their infernal Sabbath
and are passed in review by a hellish magician, who bestows
on them fresh powers. That is why old women are most
careful, before going to bed on that night, to stop up doors
and windows and every other opening in order to bar out the
witches and warlocks, who but for this sage precaution might
steal into the house and make the first trial of their new
powers on the unfortunate inmates.<note place='foot'>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Calendrier Belge</hi> (Brussels, 1861-1862),
i. 423 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Rottenburg, in
Swabia, people thought that the devil and the witches could
do much harm on Midsummer Eve; so they made fast
their shutters and bunged up even the chinks and crannies,
for wherever air can penetrate, there the devil and witches
can worm their way in. All night long, too, from nine in
the evening till break of day, the church bells rang to disturb
the dreadful beings at their evil work, since there is perhaps
no better means of putting the whole devilish crew to flight
than the sound of church bells.<note place='foot'>Anton Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Völksthumliches
aus Schwaben</hi>, Freiburg im Breisgau,
(1861-1862), i. 278, § 437.</note> Down to the second half
of the nineteenth century the belief in witches was still
widespread in Voigtland, a bleak mountainous region of
Central Germany. It was especially on the Eve of May
Day (Walpurgis), St. Thomas's Day, St. John's Day, and
Christmas Eve, as well as on Mondays, that they were
dreaded. Then they would come into a neighbour's house
to beg, borrow, or steal something, no matter what; but
woe to the poor wretch who suffered them to carry away
so much as a chip or splinter of wood; for they would
certainly use it to his undoing. On these witching nights
the witches rode to their Sabbath on baking-forks and the
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
dashers of churns; but if when they were hurtling through
the darkness any one standing below addressed one of
the witches by name, she would die within the year. To
counteract and undo the spells which witches cast on man
and beast, people resorted to all kinds of measures. Thus
on the before-mentioned days folk made three crosses on the
doors of the byres or guarded them by hanging up St. John's
wort, marjoram, or other equally powerful talismans. Very
often, too, the village youth would carry the war into the
enemy's quarters by marching out in a body, cracking whips,
firing guns, waving burning besoms, shouting and making an
uproar, all for the purpose of frightening and driving away
the witches.<note place='foot'>Robert Eisel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch des Voigtlandes</hi>
(Gera, 1871), p. 210, Nr. 551.</note> In Prussia witches and warlocks used regularly
to assemble twice a year on Walpurgis Night and the Eve
of St. John. The places where they held their infernal
Sabbath were various; for example, one was Pogdanzig, in
the district of Schlochau. They generally rode on a baking-fork,
but often on a black three-legged horse, and they took
their departure up the chimney with the words, <q>Up and
away and nowhere to stop!</q> When they were all gathered
on the Blocksberg or Mount of the Witches, they held high
revelry, feasting first and then dancing on a tight rope
lefthanded-wise to the inspiring strains which an old warlock
drew from a drum and a pig's head.<note place='foot'>W. J. A. von Tettau und J. D. H.
Temme, <hi rend='italic'>Die Volkssagen Ostpreussens,
Litthauens und Westpreussens</hi> (Berlin,
1837), pp. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The South Slavs
believe that on the night of Midsummer Eve a witch will
slink up to the fence of the farmyard and say, <q>The cheese
to me, the lard to me, the butter to me, the milk to me, but
the cowhide to thee!</q> After that the cow will perish
miserably and you will be obliged to bury the flesh and sell
the hide. To prevent this disaster the thing to do is to go
out into the meadows very early on Midsummer morning
while the dew is on the grass, collect a quantity of dew in a
waterproof mantle, carry it home, and having tethered your
cow wash her down with the dew. After that you have
only to place a milkpail under her udders and to milk away
as hard as you can; the amount of milk that you will
extract from that cow's dugs is quite surprising. Again, the
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
Slovenians about Görz and the Croats of Istria believe that
on the same night the witches wage pitched battles with
baptized folk, attacking them fiercely with broken stakes of
palings and stumps of trees. It is therefore a wise precaution
to grub up all the stumps in autumn and carry them
home, so that the witches may be weaponless on St. John's
Night. If the stumps are too heavy to be grubbed up, it
is well to ram them down tighter into the earth, for then
the witches will not be able to pull them up.<note place='foot'>F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</hi> (Münster
i. W., 1890), p. 128.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX. Balder and the Mistletoe.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Relation
of the fire-festivals
to
the myth
of Balder.</note>
The reader may remember that the preceding account of
the popular fire-festivals of Europe was suggested by the
myth of the Norse god Balder, who is said to have been
slain by a branch of mistletoe and burnt in a great fire. We
have now to enquire how far the customs which have been
passed in review help to shed light on the myth. In this
enquiry it may be convenient to begin with the mistletoe,
the instrument of Balder's death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Veneration
of the
Druids
for the
mistletoe.</note>
From time immemorial the mistletoe has been the
object of superstitious veneration in Europe. It was
worshipped by the Druids, as we learn from a famous
passage of Pliny. After enumerating the different kinds of
mistletoe, he proceeds: <q>In treating of this subject, the
admiration in which the mistletoe is held throughout Gaul
ought not to pass unnoticed. The Druids, for so they call
their wizards, esteem nothing more sacred than the mistletoe
and the tree on which it grows, provided only that the tree is
an oak. But apart from this they choose oak-woods for their
sacred groves and perform no sacred rites without oak-leaves;
so that the very name of Druids may be regarded as a Greek
appellation derived from their worship of the oak.<note place='foot'>Pliny derives the name Druid from
the Greek <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>drus</foreign>, <q>oak.</q> He did not
know that the Celtic word for oak was
the same (<foreign rend='italic'>daur</foreign>), and that therefore
Druid, in the sense of priest of the oak,
might be genuine Celtic, not borrowed
from the Greek. This etymology is
accepted by some modern scholars. See
G. Curtius, <hi rend='italic'>Grundzüge der Griechischen
Etymologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi> (Leipsic, 1879), pp. 238
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Vaniček, <hi rend='italic'>Griechisch-Lateinisch
Etymologisches Wörterbuch</hi> (Leipsic,
1877), pp. 368 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; (Sir) John Rhys,
<hi rend='italic'>Celtic Heathendom</hi> (London and Edinburgh,
1888), pp. 221 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> However,
this derivation is disputed by other
scholars, who prefer to derive the
name from a word meaning knowledge or wisdom, so that Druid would
mean <q>wizard</q> or <q>magician.</q> See
J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
iii. 305; Otto Schrader, <hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon
der Indogermanischen Altertumskunde</hi>
(Strasburg, 1901), pp. 638 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H.
D'Arbois de Jubainville, <hi rend='italic'>Les Druides
et les Dieux Celtiques à forme d'animaux</hi>
(Paris, 1906), pp. 1, 11, 83 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
The last-mentioned scholar formerly
held that the etymology of Druid was
unknown. See his <hi rend='italic'>Cours de Littérature
Celtique</hi>, i. (Paris, 1883) pp. 117-127.</note> For
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
they believe that whatever grows on these trees is sent from
heaven, and is a sign that the tree has been chosen by the
god himself. The mistletoe is very rarely to be met with;
but when it is found, they gather it with solemn ceremony.
This they do above all on the sixth day of the moon, from
whence they date the beginnings of their months, of their
years, and of their thirty years' cycle, because by the sixth
day the moon has plenty of vigour and has not run half its
course. After due preparations have been made for a
sacrifice and a feast under the tree, they hail it as the
universal healer and bring to the spot two white bulls,
whose horns have never been bound before. A priest clad
in a white robe climbs the tree and with a golden sickle
cuts the mistletoe, which is caught in a white cloth. Then
they sacrifice the victims, praying that God may make his
own gift to prosper with those upon whom he has bestowed
it. They believe that a potion prepared from mistletoe will
make barren animals to bring forth, and that the plant is a
remedy against all poison. So much of men's religion is
commonly concerned with trifles.</q><note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvi. 249-251.
In the first edition of this book I understood
Pliny to say that the Druidical
ceremony of cutting the mistletoe fell
in the sixth month, that is, in June;
and hence I argued that it probably
formed part of the midsummer festival.
But in accordance with Latin usage the
words of Pliny (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sexta luna</foreign>, literally
<q>sixth moon</q>) can only mean <q>the
sixth day of the month.</q> I have to
thank my friend Mr. W. Warde Fowler
for courteously pointing out my mistake
to me. Compare my note in the
<hi rend='italic'>Athenaeum</hi>, November 21st, 1891, p.
687. I also misunderstood Pliny's
words, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>et saeculi post tricesimum
annum, quia jam virium abunde habeat
nec sit sui dimidia</foreign>,</q> applying them
to the tree instead of to the moon, to
which they really refer. After <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>saeculi</foreign> we
must understand <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>principium</foreign> from the
preceding <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>principia</foreign>. With the thirty
years' cycle of the Druids we may
compare the sixty years' cycle of the
Boeotian festival of the Great Daedala
(Pausanias, ix. 3. 5; see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic
Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii.
140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), which, like the Druidical rite
in question, was essentially a worship,
or perhaps rather a conjuration, of the
sacred oak. Whether any deeper
affinity, based on common Aryan
descent, may be traced between the
Boeotian and the Druidical ceremony,
I do not pretend to determine. In
India a cycle of sixty years, based on
the sidereal revolution of Jupiter, has
long been in use. The sidereal revolution
of Jupiter is accomplished in
approximately twelve solar years (more
exactly 11 years and 315 days), so that
five of its revolutions make a period of
approximately sixty years. It seems,
further, that in India a much older cycle
of sixty lunar years was recognized.
See Christian Lassen, <hi rend='italic'>Indische Alter-thumskunde</hi>,
i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Leipsic, 1867), pp.
988 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Prof. F. Kielhorn (Göttingen),
<q>The Sixty-year Cycle of
Jupiter,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Indian Antiquary</hi>, xviii.
(1889) pp. 193-209; J. F. Fleet, <q>A
New System of the Sixty-year Cycle of
Jupiter,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> pp. 221-224. In Tibet
the use of a sixty-years' cycle has been
borrowed from India. See W. Woodville
Rockhill, <q>Tibet,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society for 1891</hi> (London,
1891), p. 207 note 1.</note>
</p>

<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Medical
and
magical
virtues
ascribed to
mistletoe in
ancient
Italy.</note>
In another passage Pliny tells us that in medicine the
mistletoe which grows on an oak was esteemed the most
efficacious, and that its efficacy was by some superstitious
people supposed to be increased if the plant was gathered
on the first day of the moon without the use of iron, and if
when gathered it was not allowed to touch the earth; oak-mistletoe
thus obtained was deemed a cure for epilepsy;
carried about by women it assisted them to conceive; and
it healed ulcers most effectually, if only the sufferer chewed
a piece of the plant and laid another piece on the sore.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxiv. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Yet, again, he says that mistletoe was supposed, like
vinegar and an egg, to be an excellent means of extinguishing
a fire.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxxiii. 94.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Agreement
between
the Druids
and the
ancient
Italians as
to the valuable
properties
of
mistletoe.</note>
If in these latter passages Pliny refers, as he apparently
does, to the beliefs current among his contemporaries in
Italy, it will follow that the Druids and the Italians were to
some extent agreed as to the valuable properties possessed
by mistletoe which grows on an oak; both of them deemed
it an effectual remedy for a number of ailments, and both of
them ascribed to it a quickening virtue, the Druids believing
that a potion prepared from mistletoe would fertilize barren
cattle, and the Italians holding that a piece of mistletoe
carried about by a woman would help her to conceive a
child. Further, both peoples thought that if the plant were
to exert its medicinal properties it must be gathered in a
certain way and at a certain time. It might not be cut
with iron, hence the Druids cut it with gold; and it might
not touch the earth, hence the Druids caught it in a white
cloth. In choosing the time for gathering the plant, both
peoples were determined by observation of the moon; only
they differed as to the particular day of the moon, the
Italians preferring the first, and the Druids the sixth.
</p>

<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
beliefs as
to mistletoe
among the
Ainos of
Japan.</note>
With these beliefs of the ancient Gauls and Italians as
to the wonderful medicinal properties of mistletoe we may
compare the similar beliefs of the modern Ainos of Japan.
We read that they, <q>like many nations of the Northern
origin, hold the mistletoe in peculiar veneration. They
look upon it as a medicine, good in almost every disease,
and it is sometimes taken in food and at others separately
as a decoction. The leaves are used in preference to the
berries, the latter being of too sticky a nature for general
purposes.... But many, too, suppose this plant to have
the power of making the gardens bear plentifully. When
used for this purpose, the leaves are cut up into fine pieces,
and, after having been prayed over, are sown with the millet
and other seeds, a little also being eaten with the food.
Barren women have also been known to eat the mistletoe,
in order to be made to bear children. That mistletoe
which grows upon the willow is supposed to have the
greatest efficacy. This is because the willow is looked upon
by them as being an especially sacred tree.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. John Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu
and their Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1901), p.
222.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
beliefs as
to mistletoe
among the
Torres
Straits
Islanders
and the
Walos of
Senegambia. These
beliefs
perhaps
originate
in a notion
that the
mistletoe
has fallen
from
heaven.</note>
Thus the Ainos agree with the Druids in regarding
mistletoe as a cure for almost every disease, and they agree
with the ancient Italians that applied to women it helps
them to bear children. A similar belief as to the fertilizing
influence of mistletoe, or of similar plants, upon women is
entertained by the natives of Mabuiag, an island in Torres
Straits. These savages imagine that twins can be produced
<q>by the pregnant woman touching or breaking a branch of
a loranthaceous plant (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum sp.</foreign>, probably <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>V. orientale</foreign>)
parasitic on a tree, <foreign rend='italic'>mader</foreign>. The wood of this tree is much
esteemed for making digging sticks and as firewood, no
twin-producing properties are inherent in it, nor is it regarded
as being infected with the properties of its twin-producing
parasite.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological
Expedition to Torres Straits</hi>,
v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 198 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, the Druidical notion that the
mistletoe was an <q>all-healer</q> or panacea may be compared
with a notion entertained by the Walos of Senegambia.
These people <q>have much veneration for a sort of mistletoe,
which they call <foreign rend='italic'>tob</foreign>; they carry leaves of it on their persons
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
when they go to war as a preservative against wounds, just
as if the leaves were real talismans (<foreign rend='italic'>gris-gris</foreign>).</q> The French
writer who records this practice adds: <q>Is it not very
curious that the mistletoe should be in this part of Africa
what it was in the superstitions of the Gauls? This prejudice,
common to the two countries, may have the same
origin; blacks and whites will doubtless have seen, each of
them for themselves, something supernatural in a plant
which grows and flourishes without having roots in the earth.
May they not have believed, in fact, that it was a plant
fallen from the sky, a gift of the divinity?</q><note place='foot'>M. le baron Roger (ancien Gouverneur
de la Colonie française du Sénégal),
<q>Notice sur le Gouvernement,
les Mœurs, et les Superstitions des
Nègres du pays de Walo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de
la Société de Géographie</hi>, viii. (Paris,
1827) pp. 357 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Such a
notion
would
explain
the ritual
used in
cutting
mistletoe
and other
parasites.</note>
This suggestion as to the origin of the superstition is
strongly confirmed by the Druidical belief, reported by Pliny,
that whatever grew on an oak was sent from heaven and
was a sign that the tree had been chosen by the god himself.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>.</note>
Such a belief explains why the Druids cut the
mistletoe, not with a common knife, but with a golden sickle,<note place='foot'><p>Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Times</hi>, 2nd April,
1901, p. 9: <q>The Tunis correspondent
of the <hi rend='italic'>Temps</hi> reports that in the course
of certain operations in the Belvedere
Park in Tunis the workmen discovered
a huge circle of enormous stumps of
trees ranged round an immense square
stone showing signs of artistic chisel
work. In the neighbourhood were
found a sort of bronze trough containing
a gold sickle in perfect preservation,
and a sarcophagus containing a
skeleton. About the forehead of the
skeleton was a gold band, having in
the centre the image of the sun, accompanied
by hieratic signs, which are provisionally
interpreted as the monogram
of Teutates. The discovery of such
remains in North Africa has created a
sensation.</q> As to the Celtic god Teutates
and the human sacrifices offered
to him, see Lucan, <hi rend='italic'>Pharsalia</hi>, i.
444 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>:
</p>
<p>
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et quibus immitis placatur sanguine diro<lb/>
Teutates horrensque feris altaribus Hesus.</foreign></q>
</p>
<p>
Compare (Sir) John Rhys, <hi rend='italic'>Celtic
Heathendom</hi> (London and Edinburgh,
1888), pp. 44 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 232. Branches of
the sacred olive at Olympia, which
were to form the victors' crowns, had
to be cut with a golden sickle by a boy
whose parents were both alive. See
the Scholiast on Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Olymp.</hi> iii.
60, p. 102, ed. Aug. Boeck (Leipsic,
1819). In Assyrian ritual it was laid
down that, before felling a sacred tamarisk
to make magical images out of the
wood, the magician should pray to the
sun-god Shamash and touch the tree
with a golden axe. See C. Fossey,
<hi rend='italic'>La Magie Assyrienne</hi> (Paris, 1902),
pp. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Some of the ancients
thought that the root of the marsh-mallow,
which was used in medicine,
should be dug up with gold and then
preserved from contact with the ground
(Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xx. 29). At the
great horse-sacrifice in ancient India it
was prescribed by ritual that the horse
should be slain by a golden knife,
because <q>gold is light</q> and <q>by
means of the golden light the sacrificer
also goes to the heavenly world.</q> See
<hi rend='italic'>The Satapatha-Brâhmana</hi>, translated
by Julius Eggeling, Part v. (Oxford,
1900) p. 303 (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred Books of the
East</hi>, vol. xliv.). It has been a rule of
superstition both in ancient and modern
times that certain plants, to which
medical or magical virtues were attributed,
should not be cut with iron.
See the fragment of Sophocles's <hi rend='italic'>Root-cutters</hi>,
quoted by Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn</hi>.
v. 19. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iv. 513 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metamorph.</hi> vii. 227; Pliny,
<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxiv. 68, 103, 176; and
above, p. 65 (as to purple loosestrife
in Russia). On the objection to the
use of iron in such cases compare F.
Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Des Gervasius von Tilbury
Otia Imperialia</hi> (Hanover, 1856), pp.
102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the
Soul</hi>, pp. 225 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></p></note>
and why, when cut, it was not suffered to touch the earth;
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
probably they thought that the celestial plant would have
been profaned and its marvellous virtue lost by contact with
the ground. With the ritual observed by the Druids in
cutting the mistletoe we may compare the ritual which in
Cambodia is prescribed in a similar case. They say that
when you see an orchid growing as a parasite on a tamarind
tree, you should dress in white, take a new earthenware pot,
then climb the tree at noon, break off the plant, put it in the
pot, and let the pot fall to the ground. After that you
make in the pot a decoction which confers the gift of invulnerability.<note place='foot'>Étienne Aymonier, <q>Notes sur les
Coutumes et Croyances Superstitieuses
des Cambodgiens,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cochinchine Française,
Excursions et Reconnaissance</hi>
No. 16 (Saigon, 1883), p. 136.</note>
Thus just as in Africa the leaves of one parasitic
plant are supposed to render the wearer invulnerable, so in
Cambodia a decoction made from another parasitic plant is
considered to render the same service to such as make use of
it, whether by drinking or washing. We may conjecture
that in both places the notion of invulnerability is suggested
by the position of the plant, which, occupying a place of
comparative security above the ground, appears to promise
to its fortunate possessor a similar security from some of
the ills that beset the life of man on earth. We have
already met with many examples of the store which the
primitive mind sets on such vantage grounds.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 2 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
ancient
beliefs and
practices
concerning
mistletoe
have their
analogies
in modern
European
folk-lore.</note>
Whatever may be the origin of these beliefs and
practices concerning the mistletoe, certain it is that some
of them have their analogies in the folk-lore of modern
European peasants. For example, it is laid down as a
rule in various parts of Europe that mistletoe may not be
cut in the ordinary way but must be shot or knocked down
with stones from the tree on which it is growing. Thus, in
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
the Swiss canton of Aargau <q>all parasitic plants are
esteemed in a certain sense holy by the country folk, but
most particularly so the mistletoe growing on an oak.
They ascribe great powers to it, but shrink from cutting it
off in the usual manner. Instead of that they procure it
in the following manner. When the sun is in Sagittarius
and the moon is on the wane, on the first, third, or fourth
day before the new moon, one ought to shoot down with an
arrow the mistletoe of an oak and to catch it with the left
hand as it falls. Such mistletoe is a remedy for every
ailment of children.</q><note place='foot'>Ernst Meier, <q>Über Pflanzen und
Kräuter,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie
und Sittenkunde</hi>, i. (Göttingen,
1853), pp. 443 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The sun enters
the sign of Sagittarius about November
22nd.</note> Here among the Swiss peasants, as
among the Druids of old, special virtue is ascribed to
mistletoe which grows on an oak: it may not be cut in the
usual way: it must be caught as it falls to the ground; and it
is esteemed a panacea for all diseases, at least of children. In
Sweden, also, it is a popular superstition that if mistletoe is
to possess its peculiar virtue, it must either be shot down out
of the oak or knocked down with stones.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
iii. 533, referring to Dybeck, <hi rend='italic'>Runa</hi>,
1845, p. 80.</note> Similarly, <q>so late
as the early part of the nineteenth century, people in Wales
believed that for the mistletoe to have any power, it must be
shot or struck down with stones off the tree where it grew.</q><note place='foot'>Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and
Folk-stories of Wales</hi> (London, 1909),
p. 87.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Medicinal
virtues
ascribed
to mistletoe
by ancients
and
moderns. Mistletoe
as a cure
for epilepsy.</note>
Again, in respect of the healing virtues of mistletoe the
opinion of modern peasants, and even of the learned, has
to some extent agreed with that of the ancients. The
Druids appear to have called the plant, or perhaps the oak
on which it grew, the <q>all-healer</q>;<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvi. 250,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnia sanantem appellantes suo
vocabulo</foreign>.</q> See above, p. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>.</note> and <q>all-healer</q> is said
to be still a name of the mistletoe in the modern Celtic
speech of Brittany, Wales, Ireland, and Scotland.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
ii. 1009: <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sonst aber wird das welsche</foreign>
olhiach, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>bretagn.</foreign> ollyiach, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>ir.</foreign> uileiceach,
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>gal.</foreign> uileice, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>d. i. allheiland</foreign>, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>von</foreign>
ol, uile universalis, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>als benennung des
mistels angegeben</foreign>.</q> My lamented
friend, the late R. A. Neil of Pembroke
College, Cambridge, pointed
out to me that in N. M'Alpine's <hi rend='italic'>Gaelic
Dictionary</hi> (Seventh Edition, Edinburgh
and London, 1877, p. 432) the
Gaelic word for mistletoe is given as
<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>an t' uil</foreign>, which, Mr. Neil told me,
means <q>all-healer.</q></note> On St.
John's morning (Midsummer morning) peasants of Piedmont
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
and Lombardy go out to search the oak-leaves for the <q>oil
of St. John,</q> which is supposed to heal all wounds made
with cutting instruments.<note place='foot'>A. de Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>La Mythologie
des Plantes</hi> (Paris, 1878-1882), ii. 73.</note> Originally, perhaps, the <q>oil of
St. John</q> was simply the mistletoe, or a decoction made
from it. For in Holstein the mistletoe, especially oak-mistletoe,
is still regarded as a panacea for green wounds
and as a sure charm to secure success in hunting;<note place='foot'>Rev. Hilderic Friend, <hi rend='italic'>Flowers and
Flower Lore</hi>, Third Edition (London,
1886), p. 378. Compare A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Gütersloh, 1886), p. 206, referring
to Keysler, <hi rend='italic'>Antiq. Sept.</hi> p. 308.</note> and at
Lacaune, in the south of France, the old Druidical belief in
the mistletoe as an antidote to all poisons still survives
among the peasantry; they apply the plant to the stomach
of the sufferer or give him a decoction of it to drink.<note place='foot'>A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes et
Traditions des Provinces de France</hi>
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
The local name for mistletoe here is <foreign rend='italic'>besq</foreign>,
which may be derived from the Latin
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>viscum</foreign>.</note>
Again, the ancient belief that mistletoe is a cure for epilepsy
has survived in modern times not only among the ignorant
but among the learned. Thus in Sweden persons afflicted
with the falling sickness think they can ward off attacks of
the malady by carrying about with them a knife which has
a handle of oak mistletoe;<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herabkunft des
Feuers und des Göttertranks</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Gütersloh,
1886), p. 205; Walter K. Kelly,
<hi rend='italic'>Curiosities of Indo-European Tradition
and Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1863), p. 186.</note> and in Germany for a similar
purpose pieces of mistletoe used to be hung round the
necks of children.<note place='foot'><q>Einige Notizen aus einem alten
Kräuterbuche,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche
Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>, iv. (Göttingen,
1859) pp. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the French province of Bourbonnais
a popular remedy for epilepsy is a decoction of mistletoe
which has been gathered on an oak on St. John's Day and
boiled with rye-flour.<note place='foot'>Francis Pérot, <q>Prières, Invocations,
Formules Sacrées, Incantations
en Bourbonnais,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions
Populaires</hi>, xviii. (1903) p. 299.</note> So at Bottesford in Lincolnshire a
decoction of mistletoe is supposed to be a palliative for this
terrible disease.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>County Folk-lore</hi>, v. <hi rend='italic'>Lincolnshire</hi>,
collected by Mrs. Gutch and Mabel
Peacock (London, 1908), p. 120.</note> Indeed mistletoe was recommended as a
remedy for the falling sickness by high medical authorities
in England and Holland down to the eighteenth century.<note place='foot'>Prof. P. J. Veth, <q>De Leer der
Signatuur, iii. De Mistel en de Riembloem,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, vii. (1894) p. 111.
He names Ray in England (about
1700), Boerhaave in Holland (about
1720), and Van Swieten, a pupil of
Boerhaave's (about 1745).</note>
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
At Kirton-in-Lindsey, in Lincolnshire, it is thought that
St. Vitus's dance may be cured by the water in which
mistletoe berries have been boiled.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>County Folk-lore</hi>, vol. v. <hi rend='italic'>Lincolnshire</hi>,
collected by Mrs. Gutch and
Mabel Peacock (London, 1908), p.
120.</note> In the Scotch shires
of Elgin and Moray, down to the second half of the
eighteenth century, at the full moon of March people used
to cut withes of mistletoe or ivy, make circles of them, keep
them all the year, and profess to cure hectics and other
troubles by means of them.<note place='foot'>Rev. Mr. Shaw, Minister of Elgin,
quoted by Thomas Pennant in his
<q>Tour in Scotland, 1769,</q> printed in
J. Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>,
iii. (London, 1809) p. 136; J. Brand,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</hi>
(London, 1882-1883), iii. 151.</note> In Sweden, apparently, for
other complaints a sprig of mistletoe is hung round the
patient's neck or a ring of it is worn on his finger.<note place='foot'>Walter K. Kelly, <hi rend='italic'>Curiosities of
Indo-European Tradition and Folk-lore</hi>
(London, 1863), p. 186.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
medicinal
virtues
ascribed
to mistletoe
seem to be
mythical,
being
fanciful
inferences
from the
parasitic
nature of
the plant.</note>
However, the opinion of the medical profession as to
the curative virtues of mistletoe has undergone a radical
alteration. Whereas the Druids thought that mistletoe
cured everything, modern doctors appear to think that it
cures nothing.<note place='foot'>On this point Prof. P. J. Veth
(<q>De Leer der Signatuur,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, vii.
(1894) p. 112) quotes Cauvet, <hi rend='italic'>Eléments
d'Histoire naturelle medicale</hi>,
ii. 290: <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>La famille des Loranthacées
ne nous offre aucun intéret.</foreign></q></note> If they are right, we must conclude that
the ancient and widespread faith in the medicinal virtue of
mistletoe is a pure superstition based on nothing better than
the fanciful inferences which ignorance has drawn from the
parasitic nature of the plant, its position high up on the branch
of a tree seeming to protect it from the dangers to which
plants and animals are subject on the surface of the ground.
From this point of view we can perhaps understand why
mistletoe has so long and so persistently been prescribed as
a cure for the falling sickness. As mistletoe cannot fall to
the ground because it is rooted on the branch of a tree high
above the earth, it seems to follow as a necessary consequence
that an epileptic patient cannot possibly fall down
in a fit so long as he carries a piece of mistletoe in his
pocket or a decoction of mistletoe in his stomach. Such
a train of reasoning would probably be regarded even now
as cogent by a large portion of the human species.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
belief that
mistletoe
extinguishes
fire seems
based on a
fancy that
it falls on
the tree in
a flash of
lightning.</note>
Again the ancient Italian opinion that mistletoe extinguishes
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
fire appears to be shared by Swedish peasants,
who hang up bunches of oak-mistletoe on the ceilings of
their rooms as a protection against harm in general and
conflagration in particular.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herabkunft des
Feuers und des Göttertranks</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Gütersloh,
1886), p. 205, referring to Dybeck,
<hi rend='italic'>Runa</hi>, 1845, p. 80.</note> A hint as to the way in
which mistletoe comes to be possessed of this property is
furnished by the epithet <q>thunder-besom,</q> which people of
the Aargau canton in Switzerland apply to the plant.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 204, referring
to Rochholz, <hi rend='italic'>Schweizersagen aus d.
Aargau</hi>, ii. 202.</note> For
a thunder-besom is a shaggy, bushy excrescence on branches
of trees, which is popularly believed to be produced by a
flash of lightning;<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
i. 153.</note> hence in Bohemia a thunder-besom
burnt in the fire protects the house against being struck by
a thunder-bolt.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 37,
§ 218. In Upper Bavaria the mistletoe
is burned for this purpose along with
the so-called palm-branches which
were consecrated on Palm Sunday.
See <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde
des Königreichs Bayern</hi>, i. (Munich,
1860), p. 371.</note> Being itself a product of lightning it
naturally serves, on homoeopathic principles, as a protection
against lightning, in fact as a kind of lightning-conductor.
Hence the fire which mistletoe in Sweden is designed
especially to avert from houses may be fire kindled by
lightning; though no doubt the plant is equally effective
against conflagration in general.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other
wonderful
properties
ascribed to
mistletoe;
in particular
it is
thought
to be a
protection
against
witchcraft.</note>
Again, mistletoe acts as a master-key as well as a
lightning-conductor; for it is said to open all locks.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herabkunft des
Feuers und des Göttertranks</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 206,
referring to Albertus Magnus, p. 155;
Prof. P. J. Veth, <q>De Leer der
Signatuur,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, vii. (1904) p. 111.</note> However,
in the Tyrol it can only exert this power <q>under
certain circumstances,</q> which are not specified.<note place='foot'>J. N. Ritter von Alpenburg,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythen und Sagen Tirols</hi> (Zurich,
1857), p. 398.</note> But perhaps
the most precious of all the virtues of mistletoe is that
it affords efficient protection against sorcery and witchcraft.<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 97, §
128; Prof. P. J. Veth, <q>De Leer der
Signatuur,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, vii. (1894) p. 111.</note>
That, no doubt, is the reason why in Austria a twig of
mistletoe is laid on the threshold as a preventive of nightmare;<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 267, §
419.</note>
and it may be the reason why in the north of
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
England they say that if you wish your dairy to thrive you
should give your bunch of mistletoe to the first cow that
calves after New Year's Day,<note place='foot'>W. Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Notes on the Folk-lore
of the Northern Counties of England
and the Borders</hi> (London, 1879),
p. 114.</note> for it is well known that
nothing is so fatal to milk and butter as witchcraft.
Similarly in Wales, for the sake of ensuring good luck to
the dairy, people used to give a branch of mistletoe to the
first cow that gave birth to a calf after the first hour of
the New Year; and in rural districts of Wales, where
mistletoe abounded, there was always a profusion of it in
the farmhouses. When mistletoe was scarce, Welsh
farmers used to say, <q>No mistletoe, no luck</q>; but if there
was a fine crop of mistletoe, they expected a fine crop of
corn.<note place='foot'>Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and
Folk-stories of Wales</hi> (London, 1909),
p. 88.</note> In Sweden mistletoe is diligently sought after on
St. John's Eve, the people <q>believing it to be, in a high
degree, possessed of mystic qualities; and that if a sprig of
it be attached to the ceiling of the dwelling-house, the
horse's stall, or the cow's crib, the Troll will then be powerless
to injure either man or beast.</q><note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>
(London, 1870), p. 269.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A favourite
time for
gathering
mistletoe
is Midsummer
Eve.</note>
With regard to the time when the mistletoe should be
gathered opinions have varied. The Druids gathered it
above all on the sixth day of the moon, the ancient Italians
apparently on the first day of the moon.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>.</note> In modern times
some have preferred the full moon of March and others the
waning moon of winter when the sun is in Sagittarius.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>.</note>
But the favourite time would seem to be Midsummer Eve
or Midsummer Day. We have seen that both in France
and Sweden special virtues are ascribed to mistletoe gathered
at Midsummer.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</note> The rule in Sweden is that <q>mistletoe
must be cut on the night of Midsummer Eve when sun and
moon stand in the sign of their might.</q><note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
iii. 353, referring to Dybeck, <hi rend='italic'>Runa</hi>,
1844, p. 22.</note> Again, in Wales
it was believed that a sprig of mistletoe gathered on St.
John's Eve (Midsummer Eve), or at any time before the
berries appeared, would induce dreams of omen, both good
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
and bad, if it were placed under the pillow of the sleeper.<note place='foot'>Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and
Folk-stories of Wales</hi> (London, 1909),
p. 88.</note>
Thus mistletoe is one of the many plants whose magical
or medicinal virtues are believed to culminate with the
culmination of the sun on the longest day of the year.
Hence it seems reasonable to conjecture that in the eyes of
the Druids, also, who revered the plant so highly, the sacred
mistletoe may have acquired a double portion of its mystic
qualities at the solstice in June, and that accordingly they
may have regularly cut it with solemn ceremony on Midsummer
Eve.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The two
main incidents
of
Balder's
myth,
namely the
pulling
of the
mistletoe
and the
lighting of
the bonfire,
are reproduced
in
the great
Midsummer
celebration
of Scandinavia.</note>
Be that as it may, certain it is that the mistletoe, the
instrument of Balder's death, has been regularly gathered
for the sake of its mystic qualities on Midsummer Eve in
Scandinavia, Balder's home.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</note> The plant is found commonly
growing on pear-trees, oaks, and other trees in thick damp
woods throughout the more temperate parts of Sweden.<note place='foot'>G. Wahlenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Flora Suecica</hi>
(Upsala, 1824-1826), ii. No. 1143
<hi rend='italic'>Viscum album</hi>, pp. 649 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hab. in
sylvarum densiorum et humidiorum
arboribus frondosis, ut Pyris, Quercu,
Fago etc. per Sueciam temperatiorem
passim</foreign>.</q></note>
Thus one of the two main incidents of Balder's myth is reproduced
in the great midsummer festival of Scandinavia.
But the other main incident of the myth, the burning of
Balder's body on a pyre, has also its counterpart in the
bonfires which still blaze, or blazed till lately, in Denmark,
Norway, and Sweden on Midsummer Eve.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 171 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It does not
appear, indeed, that any effigy is burned in these bonfires;
but the burning of an effigy is a feature which might
easily drop out after its meaning was forgotten. And
the name of Balder's balefires (<foreign lang='sv' rend='italic'>Balder's Bălar</foreign>), by which
these midsummer fires were formerly known in Sweden,<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>
(London, 1870), p. 259.</note>
puts their connexion with Balder beyond the reach of
doubt, and makes it probable that in former times either
a living representative or an effigy of Balder was annually
burned in them. Midsummer was the season sacred to
Balder, and the Swedish poet Tegner, in placing the burning
of Balder at midsummer,<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
iii. 78, who adds, <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Mahnen die Johannisfeuer
an Baldrs Leichenbrand?</foreign></q> This
pregnant hint perhaps contains in germ
the solution of the whole myth.</note> may very well have followed an
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
old tradition that the summer solstice was the time when
the good god came to his untimely end.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence the
myth of
Balder was
probably
the explanation
given of a
similar rite.</note>
Thus it has been shewn that the leading incidents of
the Balder myth have their counterparts in those fire-festivals
of our European peasantry which undoubtedly date from a
time long prior to the introduction of Christianity. The
pretence of throwing the victim chosen by lot into the
Beltane fire,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 148.</note> and the similar treatment of the man, the future
Green Wolf, at the midsummer bonfire in Normandy,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 186.</note> may
naturally be interpreted as traces of an older custom of
actually burning human beings on these occasions; and the
green dress of the Green Wolf, coupled with the leafy
envelope of the young fellow who trod out the midsummer
fire at Moosheim,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</note> seems to hint that the persons who
perished at these festivals did so in the character of tree-spirits
or deities of vegetation. From all this we may
reasonably infer that in the Balder myth on the one hand,
and the fire-festivals and custom of gathering mistletoe on
the other hand, we have, as it were, the two broken and
dissevered halves of an original whole. In other words, we
may assume with some degree of probability that the myth
of Balder's death was not merely a myth, that is, a description
of physical phenomena in imagery borrowed from
human life, but that it was at the same time the story
which people told to explain why they annually burned a
human representative of the god and cut the mistletoe
with solemn ceremony. If I am right, the story of Balder's
tragic end formed, so to say, the text of the sacred drama
which was acted year by year as a magical rite to cause the
sun to shine, trees to grow, crops to thrive, and to guard
man and beast from the baleful arts of fairies and trolls, of
witches and warlocks. The tale belonged, in short, to that
class of nature myths which are meant to be supplemented
by ritual; here, as so often, myth stood to magic in the
relation of theory to practice.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>If a human
representative
of a
tree-spirit
was burned
in the bonfires, what
kind of tree
did he
represent?
The
oak the
principal
sacred tree
of the
Aryans.</note>
But if the victims&mdash;the human Balders&mdash;who died by
fire, whether in spring or at midsummer, were put to death
as living embodiments of tree-spirits or deities of vegetation,
it would seem that Balder himself must have been a tree-spirit
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
or deity of vegetation. It becomes desirable, therefore,
to determine, if we can, the particular kind of tree or trees,
of which a personal representative was burned at the fire-festivals.
For we may be quite sure that it was not as
a representative of vegetation in general that the victim
suffered death. The idea of vegetation in general is too
abstract to be primitive. Most probably the victim at first
represented a particular kind of sacred tree. Now of all
European trees none has such claims as the oak to be
considered as pre-eminently the sacred tree of the Aryans.
Its worship is attested for all the great branches of the
Aryan stock in Europe. We have seen that it was not only
the sacred tree, but the principal object of worship of both
Celts and Lithuanians.<note place='foot'>As to the worship of the oak in
Europe, see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 349 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare
P. Wagler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Eiche in alter
und neuer Zeit</hi>, in two parts (Wurzen,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>, and Berlin, 1891).</note> The roving Celts appear to have
carried their worship of the oak with them even to Asia;
for in the heart of Asia Minor the Galatian senate met in
a place which bore the pure Celtic name of Drynemetum or
<q>temple of the oak.</q><note place='foot'>Strabo, xii. 5.1, p. 567. The name
is a compound of <foreign rend='italic'>dryu</foreign>, <q>oak,</q> and
<foreign rend='italic'>nemed</foreign>, <q>temple</q> (H. F. Tozer, <hi rend='italic'>Selections
from Strabo</hi>, Oxford, 1893, p.
284). We know from Jerome (<hi rend='italic'>Commentar.
in Epist. ad Galat.</hi> book ii.
praef.) that the Galatians retained
their native Celtic speech as late as
the fourth century of our era.</note> Among the Slavs the oak seems to
have been the sacred tree of the great god Perun.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 365.</note> According
to Grimm, the oak ranked first among the holy trees of
the Germans. It is certainly known to have been adored
by them in the age of heathendom, and traces of its worship
have survived in various parts of Germany almost to the
present day.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
i. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 58 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. 542, iii. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
P. Wagler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Eiche in alter und
neuer Zeit</hi> (Berlin, 1891), pp. 40 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution of
Kings</hi>, ii. 363 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 371.</note> Among the ancient Italians the oak was
sacred above all other trees.<note place='foot'>L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Berlin, 1881-1883), i. 108.</note> The image of Jupiter on the
Capitol at Rome seems to have been originally nothing but
a natural oak-tree.<note place='foot'>Livy, i. 10. Compare C. Bötticher,
<hi rend='italic'>Der Baumkultus der Hellenen</hi>
(Berlin, 1856), pp. 133 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Dodona, perhaps the oldest of all
Greek sanctuaries, Zeus was worshipped as immanent in the
sacred oak, and the rustling of its leaves in the wind was
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
his voice.<note place='foot'>C. Bötticher, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ed.
C. Robert, i. (Berlin, 1894) pp. 122
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; P. Wagler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Eiche in alter
und neuer Zeit</hi> (Berlin, 1891), pp. 2
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> It is noteworthy that at Olympia
the only wood that might be used in
sacrificing to Zeus was the white poplar
(Pausanias, v. 14. 2). But it is probable
that herein Zeus, who was an
intruder at Olympia, merely accepted
an old local custom which, long before
his arrival, had been observed in the
worship of Pelops (Pausanias, v. 13. 3).</note> If, then, the great god of both Greeks and
Romans was represented in some of his oldest shrines under
the form of an oak, and if the oak was the principal object
of worship of Celts, Germans, and Lithuanians, we may
certainly conclude that this tree was venerated by the
Aryans in common before the dispersion; and that their
primitive home must have lain in a land which was clothed
with forests of oak.<note place='foot'>Without hazarding an opinion on
the vexed question of the cradle of
the Aryans, I may observe that in
various parts of Europe the oak seems
to have been formerly more common
than it is now. See the evidence
collected in <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 349 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence the
tree represented
by
the human
victim who
was burnt
at the fire-festivals
was probably
the
oak.</note>
Now, considering the primitive character and remarkable
similarity of the fire-festivals observed by all the branches of
the Aryan race in Europe, we may infer that these festivals
form part of the common stock of religious observances which
the various peoples carried with them in their wanderings
from their old home. But, if I am right, an essential feature
of those primitive fire-festivals was the burning of a man who
represented the tree-spirit. In view, then, of the place occupied
by the oak in the religion of the Aryans, the presumption is
that the tree so represented at the fire-festivals must originally
have been the oak. So far as the Celts and Lithuanians are
concerned, this conclusion will perhaps hardly be contested.
But both for them and for the Germans it is confirmed by
a remarkable piece of religious conservatism. The most
primitive method known to man of producing fire is by
rubbing two pieces of wood against each other till they
ignite; and we have seen that this method is still used in
Europe for kindling sacred fires such as the need-fire, and
that most probably it was formerly resorted to at all the
fire-festivals under discussion. Now it is sometimes required
that the need-fire, or other sacred fire, should be made by the
friction of a particular kind of wood; and when the kind
of wood is prescribed, whether among Celts, Germans, or
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
Slavs, that wood appears to be generally the oak.<note place='foot'>However, some exceptions to the
rule are recorded. See above, vol. i. pp.
169, 278 (oak and fir), 220 (plane and
birch), 281, 283, 286 (limewood), 282
(poplar and fir), 286 (cornel-tree), 291
(birch or other hard wood), 278, 280
(nine kinds of wood). According to
Montanus, the need-fire, Easter, and
Midsummer fires were kindled by the
friction of oak and limewood. See
Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfeste,
Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</hi>
(Iserlohn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 159. But elsewhere
(pp. 33 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 127) the same
writer says that the need-fire and Midsummer
fires were produced by the
friction of oak and fir-wood.</note> Thus
we have seen that amongst the Slavs of Masuren the new
fire for the village is made on Midsummer Day by causing
a wheel to revolve rapidly round an axle of oak till the
axle takes fire.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 177.</note> When the perpetual fire which the ancient
Slavs used to maintain chanced to go out, it was rekindled
by the friction of a piece of oak-wood, which had been
previously heated by being struck with a grey (not a red)
stone.<note place='foot'>M. Prätorius, <hi rend='italic'>Deliciae Prussicae</hi>,
herausgegeben von Dr. William Pierson
(Berlin, 1871), pp. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> W. R. S.
Ralston says (on what authority I do
not know) that if the fire maintained
in honour of the Lithuanian god
Perkunas went out, it was rekindled
by sparks struck from a stone which
the image of the god held in his hand
(<hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian People</hi>, London,
1872, p. 88).</note> In Germany and the Highlands of Scotland the need-fire
was regularly, and in Russia and among the South Slavs
it was sometimes, kindled by the friction of oak-wood;<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 148, 271,
272, 274, 275, 276, 281, 289, 294.</note> and
both in Wales and the Highlands of Scotland the Beltane
fires were lighted by similar means.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 148, 155.</note> Now, if the sacred
fire was regularly kindled by the friction of oak-wood, we
may infer that originally the fire was also fed with the same
material. In point of fact, it appears that the perpetual fire
of Vesta at Rome was fed with oak-wood,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 186.</note> and that oak-wood
was the fuel consumed in the perpetual fire which
burned under the sacred oak at the great Lithuanian
sanctuary of Romove.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 366. However, sacred
fires of other wood than oak are
not unknown among Aryan peoples.
Thus at Olympia white poplar was the
wood burnt in sacrifices to Zeus (above,
p. 90 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>); at Delphi the perpetual
fire was fed with pinewood (Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>De EI apud Delphos</hi>, 2), and it was
over the glowing embers of pinewood
that the Soranian Wolves walked at
Soracte (above, p. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>).</note> Further, that oak-wood was formerly
the fuel burned in the midsummer fires may perhaps be
inferred from the custom, said to be still observed by
peasants in many mountain districts of Germany, of making
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
up the cottage fire on Midsummer Day with a heavy block
of oak-wood. The block is so arranged that it smoulders
slowly and is not finally reduced to charcoal till the expiry
of a year. Then upon next Midsummer Day the charred
embers of the old log are removed to make room for the
new one, and are mixed with the seed-corn or scattered
about the garden. This is believed to guard the food
cooked on the hearth from witchcraft, to preserve the luck
of the house, to promote the growth of the crops, and to
preserve them from blight and vermin.<note place='foot'>Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Diedeutschen Volksfeste,
Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</hi>
(Iserlohn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 127, 159. The
log is called in German <hi rend='italic'>Sckarholz</hi>.
The custom appears to have prevailed
particularly in Westphalia, about Sieg
and Lahn. Compare Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 12, as to the similar custom at
Christmas. The use of the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Scharholz</foreign>
is reported to be found also in Niederlausitz
and among the neighbouring
Saxons. See Paul Wagler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Eiche
in alter und neuer Zeit</hi> (Berlin, 1891),
pp. 86 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus the custom
is almost exactly parallel to that of the Yule-log, which in
parts of Germany, France, England, Servia, and other
Slavonic lands was commonly of oak-wood.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 248, 250, 251,
257, 258, 260, 263. Elsewhere the
Yule log has been made of fir, beech,
holly, yew, crab-tree, or olive. See
above, vol. i. pp. 249, 257, 263.</note> At the Boeotian
festival of the Daedala, the analogy of which to the spring
and midsummer festivals of modern Europe has been already
pointed out, the great feature was the felling and burning
of an oak.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The general conclusion is, that at those periodic
or occasional ceremonies the ancient Aryans both kindled
and fed the fire with the sacred oak-wood.<note place='foot'>A curious use of an oak-wood fire
to detect a criminal is reported from
Germany. If a man has been found
murdered and his murderer is unknown,
you are recommended to proceed as
follows. You kindle a fire of dry oak-wood,
you pour some of the blood from
the wounds on the fire, and you change
the poor man's shoes, putting the right
shoe on the left foot, and <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>.
As soon as that is done, the murderer
is struck blind and mad, so that he
fancies he is riding up to the throat in
water; labouring under this delusion
he returns to the corpse, when you can
apprehend him and deliver him up to
the arm of justice with the greatest ease.
See Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 159 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>If the
human
victims
burnt at
the fire-festival
represented
the oak,
the reason
for pulling
the mistletoe
may
have been
a belief
that the
life of the
oak was
in the
mistletoe,
and that
the tree
could not
perish
either by
fire or
water so
long as the
mistletoe
remained
intact
among its
boughs.</note>
But if at these solemn rites the fire was regularly made
of oak-wood, it follows that any man who was burned in it
as a personification of the tree-spirit could have represented
no tree but the oak. The sacred oak was thus burned in
duplicate; the wood of the tree was consumed in the fire,
and along with it was consumed a living man as a personification
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
of the oak-spirit. The conclusion thus drawn for
the European Aryans in general is confirmed in its special
application to the Scandinavians by the relation in which
amongst them the mistletoe appears to have stood to the
burning of the victim in the midsummer fire. We have
seen that among Scandinavians it has been customary to
gather the mistletoe at midsummer. But so far as appears
on the face of this custom, there is nothing to connect it
with the midsummer fires in which human victims or effigies
of them were burned. Even if the fire, as seems probable,
was originally always made with oak-wood, why should it
have been necessary to pull the mistletoe? The last link
between the midsummer customs of gathering the mistletoe
and lighting the bonfires is supplied by Balder's myth, which
can hardly be disjoined from the customs in question. The
myth suggests that a vital connexion may once have been
believed to subsist between the mistletoe and the human
representative of the oak who was burned in the fire. According
to the myth, Balder could be killed by nothing in heaven
or earth except the mistletoe; and so long as the mistletoe
remained on the oak, he was not only immortal but invulnerable.
Now, if we suppose that Balder was the oak, the
origin of the myth becomes intelligible. The mistletoe was
viewed as the seat of life of the oak, and so long as it was
uninjured nothing could kill or even wound the oak. The
conception of the mistletoe as the seat of life of the oak
would naturally be suggested to primitive people by the
observation that while the oak is deciduous, the mistletoe
which grows on it is evergreen. In winter the sight of its
fresh foliage among the bare branches must have been hailed
by the worshippers of the tree as a sign that the divine life
which had ceased to animate the branches yet survived in
the mistletoe, as the heart of a sleeper still beats when his
body is motionless. Hence when the god had to be killed&mdash;when
the sacred tree had to be burnt&mdash;it was necessary to
begin by breaking off the mistletoe. For so long as the
mistletoe remained intact, the oak (so people might think)
was invulnerable; all the blows of their knives and axes
would glance harmless from its surface. But once tear from
the oak its sacred heart&mdash;the mistletoe&mdash;and the tree nodded
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
to its fall. And when in later times the spirit of the oak
came to be represented by a living man, it was logically
necessary to suppose that, like the tree he personated, he
could neither be killed nor wounded so long as the mistletoe
remained uninjured. The pulling of the mistletoe was thus
at once the signal and the cause of his death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ancient
Italian
belief that
mistletoe
could not
be destroyed
by fire or
water.</note>
On this view the invulnerable Balder is neither more nor
less than a personification of a mistletoe-bearing oak. The
interpretation is confirmed by what seems to have been an
ancient Italian belief, that the mistletoe can be destroyed
neither by fire nor water;<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xiii. 119:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Alexander Cornelius arborem leonem
appellavit ex qua facta esset Argo,
similem robori viscum ferenti, quae
neque aqua neque igni possit corrumpi,
sicuti nec viscum, nulli alii cognitam,
quod equidem sciam.</foreign></q> Here the tree
out of which the ship Argo was made
is said to have been destructible neither
by fire nor water; and as the tree is
compared to a mistletoe-bearing oak,
and the mistletoe itself is said to be indestructible
by fire and water, it seems
to follow that the same indestructibility
may have been believed to attach
to the oak which bore the mistletoe,
so long at least as the mistletoe
remained rooted on the boughs.</note> for if the parasite is thus deemed
indestructible, it might easily be supposed to communicate
its own indestructibility to the tree on which it grows, so
long as the two remain in conjunction. Or to put the same
idea in mythical form we might tell how the kindly god of
the oak had his life securely deposited in the imperishable
mistletoe which grew among the branches; how accordingly
so long as the mistletoe kept its place there, the deity himself
remained invulnerable; and how at last a cunning foe,
let into the secret of the god's invulnerability, tore the mistletoe
from the oak, thereby killing the oak-god and afterwards
burning his body in a fire which could have made no impression
on him so long as the incombustible parasite retained
its seat among the boughs.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Conception
of a being
whose life
is outside
himself.</note>
But since the idea of a being whose life is thus, in a
sense, outside himself, must be strange to many readers, and
has, indeed, not yet been recognized in its full bearing on
primitive superstition, it will be worth while to illustrate it
by examples drawn both from story and custom. The
result will be to shew that, in assuming this idea as the
explanation of Balder's relation to the mistletoe, I assume
a principle which is deeply engraved on the mind of primitive
man.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. The Eternal Soul in Folk-Tales.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief that
a man's
soul may
be deposited
for
safety in a
secure
place outside
his
body, and
that so long
as it
remains
there intact
he himself
is invulnerable
and
immortal.</note>
In a former part of this work we saw that, in the opinion of
primitive people, the soul may temporarily absent itself from
the body without causing death.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</hi>, pp. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Such temporary absences
of the soul are often believed to involve considerable risk,
since the wandering soul is liable to a variety of mishaps at
the hands of enemies, and so forth. But there is another
aspect to this power of disengaging the soul from the body.
If only the safety of the soul can be ensured during its
absence, there is no reason why the soul should not continue
absent for an indefinite time; indeed a man may, on a pure
calculation of personal safety, desire that his soul should
never return to his body. Unable to conceive of life
abstractly as a <q>permanent possibility of sensation</q> or a
<q>continuous adjustment of internal arrangements to external
relations,</q> the savage thinks of it as a concrete material
thing of a definite bulk, capable of being seen and handled,
kept in a box or jar, and liable to be bruised, fractured, or
smashed in pieces. It is not needful that the life, so conceived,
should be in the man; it may be absent from his
body and still continue to animate him by virtue of a sort
of sympathy or action at a distance. So long as this object
which he calls his life or soul remains unharmed, the man
is well; if it is injured, he suffers; if it is destroyed, he
dies. Or, to put it otherwise, when a man is ill or dies, the
fact is explained by saying that the material object called
his life or soul, whether it be in his body or out of it, has
either sustained injury or been destroyed. But there may
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
be circumstances in which, if the life or soul remains in the
man, it stands a greater chance of sustaining injury than if
it were stowed away in some safe and secret place. Accordingly,
in such circumstances, primitive man takes his soul
out of his body and deposits it for security in some snug
spot, intending to replace it in his body when the danger is
past. Or if he should discover some place of absolute
security, he may be content to leave his soul there permanently.
The advantage of this is that, so long as the
soul remains unharmed in the place where he has deposited
it, the man himself is immortal; nothing can kill his body,
since his life is not in it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>This belief
is illustrated
by
folk-tales
told by
many
peoples.</note>
Evidence of this primitive belief is furnished by a class
of folk-tales of which the Norse story of <q>The giant who had
no heart in his body</q> is perhaps the best-known example.
Stories of this kind are widely diffused over the world, and
from their number and the variety of incident and of details
in which the leading idea is embodied, we may infer that
the conception of an external soul is one which has had a
powerful hold on the minds of men at an early stage of
history. For folk-tales are a faithful reflection of the world
as it appeared to the primitive mind; and we may be sure
that any idea which commonly occurs in them, however
absurd it may seem to us, must once have been an ordinary
article of belief. This assurance, so far as it concerns the
supposed power of disengaging the soul from the body for a
longer or shorter time, is amply corroborated by a comparison
of the folk-tales in question with the actual beliefs
and practices of savages. To this we shall return after some
specimens of the tales have been given. The specimens will
be selected with a view of illustrating both the characteristic
features and the wide diffusion of this class of tales.<note place='foot'>A number of the following examples
were collected by Mr. E. Clodd in his
paper, <q>The Philosophy of Punchkin,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, ii. (1884) pp. 288-303;
and again in his <hi rend='italic'>Myths and
Dreams</hi> (London, 1885), pp. 188-198.
The subject of the external soul, both in
folk-tales and in custom, has been well
handled by G. A. Wilken in his two
papers, <q>De betrekking tusschen menschen-
dieren- en plantenleven naar het
volksgeloof,</q> <hi rend='italic'>De Indische Gids</hi>, November
1884, pp. 595-612, and <q>De
Simsonsage,</q> <hi rend='italic'>De Gids</hi>, 1888, No. 5.
In <q>De Simsonsage</q> Wilken has
reproduced, to a great extent in the
same words, most of the evidence cited
by him in <q>De betrekking,</q> yet without
referring to that paper. When I
wrote this book in 1889-1890 I was
unacquainted with <q>De betrekking,</q>
but used with advantage <q>De Simsonsage,</q>
a copy of it having been kindly
sent me by the author. I am the
more anxious to express my obligations
to <q>De Simsonsage,</q> because I have
had little occasion to refer to it, most
of the original authorities cited by the
author being either in my own library
or easily accessible to me in Cambridge.
It would be a convenience to anthropologists
if Wilken's valuable papers,
dispersed as they are in various Dutch
periodicals which are seldom to be met
with in England, were collected and
published together. After the appearance
of my first anthropological essay
in 1885, Professor Wilken entered into
correspondence with me, and thenceforward
sent me copies of his papers as
they appeared; but of his papers published
before that date I have not a
complete set. (Note to the Second
Edition.) The wish expressed in the
foregoing note has now been happily
fulfilled. Wilken's many scattered
papers have been collected and published
in a form which leaves nothing
to be desired (<hi rend='italic'>De verspreide Geschriften
van Prof. Dr. G. A. Wilken</hi>, verzameld
door Mr. F. D. E. van Ossenbruggen,
in four volumes, The Hague, 1912).
The two papers <q>De betrekking</q> and
<q>De Simsonsage</q> are reprinted in the
third volume, pp. 289-309 and pp.
551-579. The subject of the external
soul in relation to Balder has been
fully illustrated and discussed by Professor
F. Kauffmann in his <hi rend='italic'>Balder,
Mythus und Sage</hi> (Strasburg, 1902),
pp. 136 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Amongst the first to
collect examples of the external soul in
folk-tales was the learned Dr. Reinhold
Köhler (in <hi rend='italic'>Orient und Occident</hi>, ii.,
Göttingen, 1864, pp. 100-103; reprinted
with additional references in the writer's
<hi rend='italic'>Kleinere Schriften</hi>, i., Weimar, 1898,
pp. 158-161). Many versions of the
tale were also cited by W. R. S.
Ralston (<hi rend='italic'>Russian Folk-tales</hi>, London,
1873, pp. 109 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>). (Note to the
Third Edition.)</note>
</p>

<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Stories of
an external
soul
common
among
Aryan
peoples.
The external
soul in
Hindoo
stories.
Punchkin
and the
parrot. The ogre
whose soul
was in a
bird.</note>
In the first place, the story of the external soul is told,
in various forms, by all Aryan peoples from Hindoostan to
the Hebrides. A very common form of it is this: A
warlock, giant, or other fairyland being is invulnerable and
immortal because he keeps his soul hidden far away in
some secret place; but a fair princess, whom he holds
enthralled in his enchanted castle, wiles his secret from him
and reveals it to the hero, who seeks out the warlock's soul,
heart, life, or death (as it is variously called), and, by destroying
it, simultaneously kills the warlock. Thus a Hindoo
story tells how a magician called Punchkin held a queen
captive for twelve years, and would fain marry her, but she
would not have him. At last the queen's son came to
rescue her, and the two plotted together to kill Punchkin.
So the queen spoke the magician fair, and pretended that
she had at last made up her mind to marry him. <q>And
do tell me,</q> she said, <q>are you quite immortal? Can death
never touch you? And are you too great an enchanter
ever to feel human suffering?</q> <q>It is true,</q> he said, <q>that
I am not as others. Far, far away, hundreds of thousands
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
of miles from this, there lies a desolate country covered
with thick jungle. In the midst of the jungle grows a
circle of palm trees, and in the centre of the circle stand
six chattees full of water, piled one above another: below
the sixth chattee is a small cage, which contains a little
green parrot;&mdash;on the life of the parrot depends my life;&mdash;and
if the parrot is killed I must die. It is, however,</q> he
added, <q>impossible that the parrot should sustain any
injury, both on account of the inaccessibility of the country,
and because, by my appointment, many thousand genii
surround the palm trees, and kill all who approach the
place.</q> But the queen's young son overcame all difficulties,
and got possession of the parrot. He brought it to the
door of the magician's palace, and began playing with it.
Punchkin, the magician, saw him, and, coming out, tried to
persuade the boy to give him the parrot. <q>Give me my
parrot!</q> cried Punchkin. Then the boy took hold of the
parrot and tore off one of his wings; and as he did so the
magician's right arm fell off. Punchkin then stretched out
his left arm, crying, <q>Give me my parrot!</q> The prince
pulled off the parrot's second wing, and the magician's left
arm tumbled off. <q>Give me my parrot!</q> cried he, and fell
on his knees. The prince pulled off the parrot's right leg,
the magician's right leg fell off; the prince pulled off the
parrot's left leg, down fell the magician's left. Nothing
remained of him except the trunk and the head; but
still he rolled his eyes, and cried, <q>Give me my parrot!</q>
<q>Take your parrot, then,</q> cried the boy; and with that he
wrung the bird's neck, and threw it at the magician; and,
as he did so, Punchkin's head twisted round, and, with a
fearful groan, he died!<note place='foot'>Mary Frere, <hi rend='italic'>Old Deccan Days</hi>, Third Edition (London, 1881), pp.
12-16.</note> In another Hindoo tale an ogre
is asked by his daughter, <q>Papa, where do you keep your
soul?</q> <q>Sixteen miles away from this place,</q> he said, <q>is
a tree. Round the tree are tigers, and bears, and scorpions,
and snakes; on the top of the tree is a very great fat
snake; on his head is a little cage; in the cage is a bird;
and my soul is in that bird.</q> The end of the ogre is like
that of the magician in the previous tale. As the bird's
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
wings and legs are torn off, the ogre's arms and legs drop
off; and when its neck is wrung he falls down dead.<note place='foot'>Maive Stokes, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Fairy Tales</hi>
(London, 1880), pp. 58-60. For
similar Hindoo stories, see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp.
187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Lai Behari Day, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales of
Bengal</hi> (London, 1883), pp. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
F. A. Steel and R. C. Temple, <hi rend='italic'>Wide-awake
Stories</hi> (Bombay and London,
1884), pp. 58-60.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
princess
whose soul
was in a
golden
necklace.
The prince
whose soul
was in a
fish.</note>
In another Hindoo story a princess called Sodewa Bai
was born with a golden necklace about her neck, and the
astrologer told her parents, <q>This is no common child; the
necklace of gold about her neck contains your daughter's
soul; let it therefore be guarded with the utmost care; for
if it were taken off, and worn by another person, she would
die.</q> So her mother caused it to be firmly fastened round
the child's neck, and, as soon as the child was old enough to
understand, she told her its value, and warned her never to
let it be taken off. In course of time Sodewa Bai was
married to a prince who had another wife living. The
first wife, jealous of her young rival, persuaded a negress to
steal from Sodewa Bai the golden necklace which contained
her soul. The negress did so, and, as soon as she put the
necklace round her own neck, Sodewa Bai died. All day
long the negress used to wear the necklace; but late at
night, on going to bed, she would take it off and put it by
till morning; and whenever she took it off, Sodewa Bai's
soul returned to her and she lived. But when morning
came, and the negress put on the necklace, Sodewa Bai
died again. At last the prince discovered the treachery of
his elder wife and restored the golden necklace to Sodewa
Bai.<note place='foot'>Mary Frere, <hi rend='italic'>Old Deccan Days</hi>,
pp. 239 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In another Hindoo story a holy mendicant tells a
queen that she will bear a son, adding, <q>As enemies will
try to take away the life of your son, I may as well tell you
that the life of the boy will be bound up in the life of a big
<foreign rend='italic'>boal</foreign> fish which is in your tank, in front of the palace. In
the heart of the fish is a small box of wood, in the box is a
necklace of gold, that necklace is the life of your son.</q>
The boy was born and received the name of Dalim. His
mother was the Suo or younger queen. But the Duo or
elder queen hated the child, and learning the secret of his
life, she caused the <foreign rend='italic'>boal</foreign> fish, with which his life was bound
up, to be caught. Dalim was playing near the tank at the
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
time, but <q>the moment the <foreign rend='italic'>boal</foreign> fish was caught in the net,
that moment Dalim felt unwell; and when the fish was
brought up to land, Dalim fell down on the ground, and
made as if he was about to breathe his last. He was
immediately taken into his mother's room, and the king was
astonished on hearing of the sudden illness of his son and
heir. The fish was by the order of the physician taken into
the room of the Duo queen, and as it lay on the floor
striking its fins on the ground, Dalim in his mother's room
was given up for lost. When the fish was cut open, a
casket was found in it; and in the casket lay a necklace of
gold. The moment the necklace was worn by the queen,
that very moment Dalim died in his mother's room.</q> The
queen used to put off the necklace every night, and whenever
she did so, the boy came to life again. But every
morning when the queen put on the necklace, he died again.<note place='foot'>Lal Behari Day, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales of Bengal</hi>,
pp. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> For similar stories of
necklaces, see Mary Frere, <hi rend='italic'>Old Deccan
Days</hi>, pp. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. A. Steel and
R. C. Temple, <hi rend='italic'>Wide-awake Stories</hi>,
pp. 83 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cashmeer
stories of
ogres
whose lives
were in
cocks, a
pigeon,
a starling,
a spinning-wheel,
and
a pillar. Cashmeer
and
Bengalee
stories of
ogres
whose lives
were in
bees.</note>
In a Cashmeer story a lad visits an old ogress, pretending
to be her grandson, the son of her daughter who had
married a king. So the old ogress took him into her confidence
and shewed him seven cocks, a spinning wheel, a
pigeon, and a starling. <q>These seven cocks,</q> said she,
<q>contain the lives of your seven uncles, who are away for a
few days. Only as long as the cocks live can your uncles
hope to live; no power can hurt them as long as the seven
cocks are safe and sound. The spinning-wheel contains my
life; if it is broken, I too shall be broken, and must die; but
otherwise I shall live on for ever. The pigeon contains your
grandfather's life, and the starling your mother's; as long as
these live, nothing can harm your grandfather or your
mother.</q> So the lad killed the seven cocks and the pigeon
and the starling, and smashed the spinning-wheel; and at
the moment he did so the ogres and ogresses perished.<note place='foot'>J. H. Knowles, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales of Kashmir</hi>,
Second Edition (London, 1893),
pp. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
another story from Cashmeer an ogre cannot die unless a
particular pillar in the verandah of his palace be broken.
Learning the secret, a prince struck the pillar again and
again till it was broken in pieces. And it was as if each
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
stroke had fallen on the ogre, for he howled lamentably and
shook like an aspen every time the prince hit the pillar,
until at last, when the pillar fell down, the ogre also fell
down and gave up the ghost.<note place='foot'>J. H. Knowles, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 134.</note> In another Cashmeer tale
an ogre is represented as laughing very heartily at the idea
that he might possibly die. He said that <q>he should never
die. No power could oppose him; no years could age him;
he should remain ever strong and ever young, for the thing
wherein his life dwelt was most difficult to obtain.</q> It was
in a queen bee, which was in a honeycomb on a tree. But
the bees in the honeycomb were many and fierce, and it was
only at the greatest risk that any one could catch the queen.
However, the hero achieved the enterprise and crushed the
queen bee; and immediately the ogre fell stone dead to the
ground, so that the whole land trembled with the shock.<note place='foot'>J. H. Knowles, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 382 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
In some Bengalee tales the life of a whole tribe of ogres is
described as concentrated in two bees. The secret was thus
revealed by an old ogress to a captive princess who pretended
to fear lest the ogress should die. <q>Know, foolish
girl,</q> said the ogress, <q>that we ogres never die. We are not
naturally immortal, but our life depends on a secret which
no human being can unravel. Let me tell you what it is,
that you may be comforted. You know yonder tank; there
is in the middle of it a crystal pillar, on the top of which in
deep waters are two bees. If any human being can dive into
the waters, and bring up to land the two bees from the pillar
in one breath, and destroy them so that not a drop of their
blood falls to the ground, then we ogres shall certainly die;
but if a single drop of blood falls to the ground, then from it
will start up a thousand ogres. But what human being will
find out this secret, or, finding it, will be able to achieve the
feat? You need not, therefore, darling, be sad; I am practically
immortal.</q> As usual, the princess reveals the secret
to the hero, who kills the bees, and that same moment all
the ogres drop down dead, each on the spot where he
happened to be standing.<note place='foot'>Lal Behari Day, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales of Bengal</hi>,
pp. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 253
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, i. (1872) p.
117. For an Indian story in which a
giant's life is in five black bees, see
W. A. Clouston, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Tales and
Fictions</hi> (Edinburgh and London,
1887), i. 350.</note> In another Bengalee story it is
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
said that all the ogres dwell in Ceylon, and that all their
lives are in a single lemon. A boy cuts the lemon in pieces,
and all the ogres die.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, i. (1872), p.
171.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
a Siamese
or Cambodian
story.
Indian
stories of
a tree and
a barley
plant that
were life-tokens.</note>
In a Siamese or Cambodian story, probably derived from
India, we are told that Thossakan or Ravana, the King of
Ceylon, was able by magic art to take his soul out of his
body and leave it in a box at home, while he went to the
wars. Thus he was invulnerable in battle. When he was
about to give battle to Rama, he deposited his soul with a
hermit called Fire-eye, who was to keep it safe for him. So
in the fight Rama was astounded to see that his arrows
struck the king without wounding him. But one of Rama's
allies, knowing the secret of the king's invulnerability, transformed
himself by magic into the likeness of the king, and
going to the hermit asked back his soul. On receiving it
he soared up into the air and flew to Rama, brandishing the
box and squeezing it so hard that all the breath left the
King of Ceylon's body, and he died.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Voelker des oestlichen
Asien</hi>, iv. (Jena, 1868) pp.
304 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a Bengalee story
a prince going into a far country planted with his own hands
a tree in the courtyard of his father's palace, and said to his
parents, <q>This tree is my life. When you see the tree green
and fresh, then know that it is well with me; when you see
the tree fade in some parts, then know that I am in an ill
case; and when you see the whole tree fade, then know that
I am dead and gone.</q><note place='foot'>Lal Behari Day, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales of Bengal</hi>,
p. 189.</note> In another Indian tale a prince,
setting forth on his travels, left behind him a barley plant,
with instructions that it should be carefully tended and
watched; for if it flourished, he would be alive and well, but
if it drooped, then some mischance was about to happen to
him. And so it fell out. For the prince was beheaded,
and as his head rolled off, the barley plant snapped in two
and the ear of barley fell to the ground.<note place='foot'>F. A. Steel and R. C. Temple,
<hi rend='italic'>Wide-awake Stories</hi> (Bombay and London,
1884), pp. 52, 64. In the Indian
<hi rend='italic'>Jataka</hi> there is a tale (book ii. No.
208) which relates how Buddha in the
form of a monkey deceived a crocodile
by pretending that monkeys kept their
hearts in figs growing on a tree. See
<hi rend='italic'>The Jataka or Stories of the Buddha's
former Births</hi> translated from the Pali
by various hands, vol. ii. translated by
W. H. D. Rouse (Cambridge, 1895),
pp. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the legend of
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
the origin of Gilgit there figures a fairy king whose soul is
in the snows and who can only perish by fire.<note place='foot'>G. W. Leitner, <hi rend='italic'>The Languages
and Races of Dardistan</hi>, Third Edition
(Lahore, 1878), p. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul
in Greek
stories.
Meleager
and the
firebrand.
Nisus and
his purple
or golden
hair.
Pterelaus
and his
golden
hair.
Modern
Greek
parallels. The external
soul
in doves.</note>
In Greek tales, ancient and modern, the idea of an
external soul is not uncommon. When Meleager was seven
days old, the Fates appeared to his mother and told her
that Meleager would die when the brand which was blazing
on the hearth had burnt down. So his mother snatched the
brand from the fire and kept it in a box. But in after-years,
being enraged at her son for slaying her brothers, she burnt
the brand in the fire and Meleager expired in agonies, as if
flames were preying on his vitals.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, i. 8;
Diodorus Siculus, iv. 34; Pausanias,
x. 31. 4; Aeschylus, <hi rend='italic'>Choeph.</hi> 604
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Antoninus Liberalis, <hi rend='italic'>Transform.</hi>
ii.; Dio Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi> lxvii. vol. ii.
p. 231, ed. L. Dindorf (Leipsic, 1857);
Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Fab.</hi> 171, 174; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi>
viii. 445 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In his play on this
theme Euripides made the life of Meleager
to depend on an olive-leaf which
his mother had given birth to along
with the babe. See J. Malalas, <hi rend='italic'>Chronographia</hi>,
vi. pp. 165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ed. L. Dindorf
(Bonn, 1831); J. Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Scholia on
Lycophron</hi>, 492 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (vol. ii. pp. 646 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
ed. Chr. G. Müller, Leipsic, 1811); G.
Knaack, <q>Zur Meleagersage,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches
Museum</hi>, N. F. xlix. (1894) pp.
310-313.</note> Again, Nisus King of
Megara had a purple or golden hair on the middle of his
head, and it was fated that whenever the hair was pulled out
the king should die. When Megara was besieged by the
Cretans, the king's daughter Scylla fell in love with Minos,
their king, and pulled out the fatal hair from her father's
head. So he died.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, iii. 15.
8; Aeschylus, <hi rend='italic'>Choeph.</hi> 612 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Pausanias,
i. 19. 4; <hi rend='italic'>Ciris</hi>, 116 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> viii. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> According
to J. Tzetzes (<hi rend='italic'>Schol. on Lycophron</hi>,
650) not the life but the strength of
Nisus was in his golden hair; when it
was pulled out, he became weak and
was slain by Minos. According to
Hyginus (<hi rend='italic'>Fab.</hi> 198) Nisus was destined
to reign only so long as he kept the
purple lock on his head.</note> Similarly Poseidon made Pterelaus
immortal by giving him a golden hair on his head. But
when Taphos, the home of Pterelaus, was besieged by
Amphitryo, the daughter of Pterelaus fell in love with
Amphitryo and killed her father by plucking out the golden
hair with which his life was bound up.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, ii. 4. 5
and 7.</note> In a modern Greek
folk-tale a man's strength lies in three golden hairs on his
head. When his mother pulls them out, he grows weak and
timid and is slain by his enemies.<note place='foot'>J. G. von Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische und
albanesische Märchen</hi> (Leipsic, 1864),
i. 217; a similar story, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> ii. 282.</note> Another Greek story, in
which we may perhaps detect a reminiscence of Nisus and
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
Scylla, relates how a certain king, who was the strongest man
of his time, had three long hairs on his breast. But when
he went to war with another king, and his own treacherous
wife had cut off the three hairs, he became the weakest of
men.<note place='foot'>B. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Märchen,
Sagen und Volkslieder</hi> (Leipsic, 1877),
pp. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The same writer found in
the island of Zacynthus a belief that the
whole strength of the ancient Greeks
resided in three hairs on their breasts,
and that it vanished whenever these
hairs were cut; but if the hairs were
allowed to grow again, their strength
returned (B. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Volksleben
der Neugriechen</hi>, Leipsic, 1871, p.
206). The Biblical story of Samson
and Delilah (Judges xvi.) implies a
belief of the same sort, as G. A. Wilken
abundantly shewed in his paper, <q>De
Simsonsage,</q> <hi rend='italic'>De Gids</hi>, 1888, No. 5
(reprinted in his <hi rend='italic'>Verspreide Geschriften</hi>,
The Hague, 1912, vol. iii. pp. 551-579).</note> In another modern Greek story the life of an enchanter
is bound up with three doves which are in the belly
of a wild boar. When the first dove is killed, the magician
grows sick; when the second is killed, he grows very sick;
and when the third is killed, he dies.<note place='foot'>J. G. von Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 215
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another Greek
story of the same sort an ogre's strength is in three singing
birds which are in a wild boar. The hero kills two of the
birds, and then coming to the ogre's house finds him lying
on the ground in great pain. He shews the third bird to
the ogre, who begs that the hero will either let it fly away
or give it to him to eat. But the hero wrings the bird's
neck, and the ogre dies on the spot.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> ii. 275 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Similar stories,
<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> ii. 204, 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In an Albanian
story a monster's strength is in three
pigeons, which are in a hare, which is
in the silver tusk of a wild boar. When
the boar is killed, the monster feels ill;
when the hare is cut open, he can
hardly stand on his feet; when the
three pigeons are killed, he expires.
See Aug. Dozon, <hi rend='italic'>Contes albanais</hi> (Paris,
1881), pp. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a variant of the
latter story the monster's strength is in two doves, and when
the hero kills one of them, the monster cries out, <q>Ah, woe
is me! Half my life is gone. Something must have
happened to one of the doves.</q> When the second dove is
killed, he dies.<note place='foot'>J. G. von Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 260
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In another Greek story the incidents of the
three golden hairs and three doves are artificially combined.
A monster has on his head three golden hairs which open
the door of a chamber in which are three doves: when the
first dove is killed, the monster grows sick; when the second
is killed, he grows worse; and when the third is killed, he
dies.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> i. 187.</note> In another Greek tale an old man's strength is in a
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
ten-headed serpent. When the serpent's heads are being
cut off, he feels unwell; and when the last head is struck off,
he expires.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> ii. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another Greek story a dervish tells a queen
that she will have three sons, that at the birth of each she
must plant a pumpkin in the garden, and that in the fruit
borne by the pumpkins will reside the strength of the
children. In due time the infants are born and the pumpkins
planted. As the children grow up, the pumpkins grow
with them. One morning the eldest son feels sick, and on
going into the garden they find that the largest pumpkin is
gone. Next night the second son keeps watch in a summer-house
in the garden. At midnight a negro appears and cuts
the second pumpkin. At once the boy's strength goes out
of him, and he is unable to pursue the negro. The
youngest son, however, succeeds in slaying the negro and
recovering the lost pumpkins.<note place='foot'>Émile Legrand, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires
grecs</hi> (Paris, 1881), pp. 191 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul
in Italian
stories.
Silvia's son.
The dragon
twin.
The soul in
a gem.</note>
Ancient Italian legend furnishes a close parallel to the
Greek story of Meleager. Silvia, the young wife of Septimius
Marcellus, had a child by the god Mars. The god
gave her a spear, with which he said that the fate of the
child would be bound up. When the boy grew up he
quarrelled with his maternal uncles and slew them. So in
revenge his mother burned the spear on which his life depended.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Parallela</hi>, 26. In both
the Greek and Italian stories the subject
of quarrel between nephew and
uncles is the skin of a boar, which the
nephew presented to his lady-love and
which his uncles took from her.</note>
In one of the stories of the <hi rend='italic'>Pentamerone</hi> a certain
queen has a twin brother, a dragon. The astrologers declared
at her birth that she would live just as long as the
dragon and no longer, the death of the one involving the death
of the other. If the dragon were killed, the only way to
restore the queen to life would be to smear her temples, breast,
pulses, and nostrils with the blood of the dragon.<note place='foot'>G. Basile, <hi rend='italic'>Pentamerone</hi>, übertragen
von Felix Liebrecht (Breslau, 1846), ii.
60 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a
modern Roman version of <q>Aladdin and the Wonderful
Lamp,</q> the magician tells the princess, whom he holds captive
in a floating rock in mid-ocean, that he will never die. The
princess reports this to the prince her husband, who has
come to rescue her. The prince replies, <q>It is impossible
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
but that there should be some one thing or other that is
fatal to him; ask him what that one fatal thing is.</q> So
the princess asked the magician, and he told her that in
the wood was a hydra with seven heads; in the middle
head of the hydra was a leveret, in the head of the leveret
was a bird, in the bird's head was a precious stone, and if
this stone were put under his pillow he would die. The
prince procured the stone, and the princess laid it under
the magician's pillow. No sooner did the enchanter lay his
head on the pillow than he gave three terrible yells, turned
himself round and round three times, and died.<note place='foot'>R. H. Busk, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of Rome</hi> (London, 1874), pp. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Italian
story of a
wicked
fairy whose
death was
in an egg. A sorcerer
Body-without-Soul
whose
death was
in an egg.</note>
Another Italian tale sets forth how a great cloud,
which was really a fairy, used to receive a young girl
as tribute every year from a certain city; and the inhabitants
had to give the girls up, for if they did not,
the cloud would throw things at them and kill them all.
One year it fell to the lot of the king's daughter to be
handed over to the cloud, and they took her in procession,
to the roll of muffled drums, and attended by her
weeping father and mother, to the top of a mountain, and
left her sitting in a chair there all alone. Then the fairy
cloud came down on the top of the mountain, set the
princess in her lap, and began to suck her blood out of her
little finger; for it was on the blood of girls that this wicked
fairy lived. When the poor princess was faint with the loss
of blood and lay like a log, the cloud carried her away
up to her fairy palace in the sky. But a brave youth had
seen all that happened from behind a bush, and no sooner
did the fairy spirit away the princess to her palace than he
turned himself into an eagle and flew after them. He
lighted on a tree just outside the palace, and looking in
at the window he beheld a room full of young girls all in
bed; for these were the victims of former years whom the
fairy cloud had half killed by sucking their blood; yet they
called her mamma. When the fairy went away and left the
girls, the brave young man had food drawn up for them by
ropes, and he told them to ask the fairy how she might be
killed and what was to become of them when she died. It
was a delicate question, but the fairy answered it, saying, <q>I
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
shall never die.</q> However, when the girls pressed her, she
took them out on a terrace and said, <q>Do you see that
mountain far off there? On that mountain is a tigress
with seven heads. If you wish me to die, a lion must fight
that tigress and tear off all seven of her heads. In her body
is an egg, and if any one hits me with it in the middle of
my forehead, I shall die; but if that egg falls into my
hands, the tigress will come to life again, resume her seven
heads, and I shall live.</q> When the young girls heard this
they pretended to be glad and said, <q>Good! certainly our
mamma can never die,</q> but naturally they were discouraged.
However, when she went away again, they told it all to the
young man, and he bade them have no fear. Away he went
to the mountain, turned himself into a lion, and fought the
tigress. Meantime the fairy came home, saying, <q>Alas! I
feel ill!</q> For six days the fight went on, the young man
tearing off one of the tigress's heads each day, and each day
the strength of the fairy kept ebbing away. Then after
allowing himself two days' rest the hero tore off the seventh
head and secured the egg, but not till it had rolled into the
sea and been brought back to him by a friendly dog-fish.
When he returned to the fairy with the egg in his hand, she
begged and prayed him to give it her, but he made her first
restore the young girls to health and send them away in
handsome carriages. When she had done so, he struck her
on the forehead with the egg, and she fell down dead.<note place='foot'>T. F. Crane, <hi rend='italic'>Italian Popular
Tales</hi> (London, 1885), pp. 31-34.
The hero had acquired the power of
turning himself into an eagle, a lion,
and an ant from three creatures of
these sorts whose quarrel about their
shares in a dead ass he had composed.
This incident occurs in other tales of the
same type. See below, note 2 and pp.
<ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> with note 2, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> with note 1.</note>
Similarly in a story from the western Riviera a sorcerer
called Body-without-Soul can only be killed by means of an
egg which is in an eagle, which is in a dog, which is in a
lion; and the egg must be broken on the sorcerer's forehead.
The hero, who achieves the adventure, has received the
power of changing himself into a lion, a dog, an eagle, and an
ant from four creatures of these sorts among whom he had
fairly divided the carcase of a dead ass.<note place='foot'>J. B. Andrews, <hi rend='italic'>Contes Ligures</hi>
(Paris, 1892), No. 46, pp. 213 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
In a parallel Sicilian story the hero
Beppino slays a sorcerer in the same
manner after he had received from an
eagle, a lion, and an ant the same
gift of transformation in return for the
same service. See G. Pitrè, <hi rend='italic'>Fiabe,
Novelle e Racconti popolari Siciliani</hi>,
ii. (Palermo, 1875) p. 215; and for
another Sicilian parallel, Laura Gonzenbach,
<hi rend='italic'>Sicilianische Märchen</hi> (Leipsic,
1870), No. 6, pp. 34-38.</note>
</p>

<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
Slavonic
stories.
Russian
story of
Koshchei
the
Deathless,
whose
death was
in an egg.</note>
Stories of the same sort are current among Slavonic
peoples. In some of them, as in the biblical story of
Samson and Delilah, the warlock is questioned by a
treacherous woman as to the place where his strength
resides or his life or death is stowed away; and his suspicions
being roused by her curiosity, he at first puts her off
with false answers, but is at last beguiled into telling her
the truth, thereby incurring his doom through her treachery.
Thus a Russian story tells how a certain warlock called
Kashtshei or Koshchei the Deathless carried off a princess
and kept her prisoner in his golden castle. However, a
prince made up to her one day as she was walking alone
and disconsolate in the castle garden, and cheered by the
prospect of escaping with him she went to the warlock and
coaxed him with false and flattering words, saying, <q>My
dearest friend, tell me, I pray you, will you never die?</q>
<q>Certainly not,</q> says he. <q>Well,</q> says she, <q>and where is
your death? is it in your dwelling?</q> <q>To be sure it is,</q>
says he, <q>it is in the broom under the threshold.</q> Thereupon
the princess seized the broom and threw it on the fire,
but although the broom burned, the deathless Koshchei remained
alive; indeed not so much as a hair of him was singed.
Balked in her first attempt, the artful hussy pouted and said,
<q>You do not love me true, for you have not told me where
your death is; yet I am not angry, but love you with all
my heart.</q> With these fawning words she besought the
warlock to tell her truly where his death was. So he
laughed and said, <q>Why do you wish to know? Well
then, out of love I will tell you where it lies. In a certain
field there stand three green oaks, and under the roots of
the largest oak is a worm, and if ever this worm is found
and crushed, that instant I shall die.</q> When the princess
heard these words, she went straight to her lover and told
him all; and he searched till he found the oaks and dug up
the worm and crushed it. Then he hurried to the warlock's
castle, but only to learn from the princess that the warlock
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
was still alive. Then she fell to wheedling and coaxing
Koshchei once more, and this time, overcome by her wiles,
he opened his heart to her and told her the truth. <q>My
death,</q> said he, <q>is far from here and hard to find, on the
wide ocean. In that sea is an island, and on the island there
grows a green oak, and beneath the oak is an iron chest, and
in the chest is a small basket, and in the basket is a hare,
and in the hare is a duck, and in the duck is an egg; and
he who finds the egg and breaks it, kills me at the same
time.</q> The prince naturally procured the fateful egg and
with it in his hands he confronted the deathless warlock.
The monster would have killed him, but the prince began to
squeeze the egg. At that the warlock shrieked with pain,
and turning to the false princess, who stood by smirking
and smiling, <q>Was it not out of love for you,</q> said he,
<q>that I told you where my death was? And is this the
return you make to me?</q> With that he grabbed at his
sword, which hung from a peg on the wall; but before he
could reach it, the prince had crushed the egg, and sure
enough the deathless warlock found his death at the same
moment.<note place='foot'>Anton Dietrich, <hi rend='italic'>Russian Popular Tales</hi> (London, 1857), pp. 21-24.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other
versions of
the story of
Koshchei
the
Deathless. Death in
the blue
rose-tree.</note>
In another version of the same story, when the cunning
warlock deceives the traitress by telling her that his
death is in the broom, she gilds the broom, and at supper
the warlock sees it shining under the threshold and asks her
sharply, <q>What's that?</q> <q>Oh,</q> says she, <q>you see how I
honour you.</q> <q>Simpleton!</q> says he, <q>I was joking. My
death is out there fastened to the oak fence.</q> So next day
when the warlock was out, the prince came and gilded the
whole fence; and in the evening when the warlock was at
supper he looked out of the window and saw the fence
glittering like gold. <q>And pray what may that be?</q> said
he to the princess. <q>You see,</q> said she, <q>how I respect
you. If you are dear to me, dear too is your death. That
is why I have gilded the fence in which your death resides.</q>
The speech pleased the warlock, and in the fulness of his
heart he revealed to her the fatal secret of the egg. When
the prince, with the help of some friendly animals, obtained
possession of the egg, he put it in his bosom and repaired to
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
the warlock's house. The warlock himself was sitting at the
window in a very gloomy frame of mind; and when the
prince appeared and shewed him the egg, the light grew
dim in the warlock's eyes and he became all of a sudden
very meek and mild. But when the prince began to play
with the egg and to throw it from one hand to the other, the
deathless Koshchei staggered from one corner of the room
to the other, and when the prince broke the egg, Koshchei
the Deathless fell down and died.<note place='foot'>Jeremiah Curtin, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Folk-tales
of the Russians, Western Slavs,
and Magyars</hi> (London, 1891), pp.
119-122. Compare W. R. S. Ralston,
<hi rend='italic'>Russian Folk-tales</hi> (London, 1873),
pp. 100-105.</note> <q>In one of the descriptions
of Koshchei's death, he is said to be killed by a blow
on the forehead inflicted by the mysterious egg&mdash;that last
link in the magic chain by which his life is darkly bound.
In another version of the same story, but told of a snake, the
fatal blow is struck by a small stone found in the yolk of an
egg, which is inside a duck, which is inside a hare, which is
inside a stone, which is on an island.</q><note place='foot'>W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 109.</note> In another Russian
story the death of an enchantress is in a blue rose-tree in a
blue forest. Prince Ivan uproots the rose-tree, whereupon
the enchantress straightway sickens. He brings the rose-tree
to her house and finds her at the point of death. Then
he throws it into the cellar, crying, <q>Behold her death!</q>
and at once the whole building shakes, <q>and becomes an
island, on which are people who had been sitting in Hell,
and who offer up thanks to Prince Ivan.</q><note place='foot'>W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Russian Folk-tales</hi>,
pp. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another
Russian story a prince is grievously tormented by a witch
who has got hold of his heart, and keeps it seething in a
magic cauldron.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, p. 114.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
Bohemian
and
Servian
stories.
True Steel,
whose
strength
was in
a bird.</note>
In a Bohemian tale a warlock's strength lies in an egg
which is in a duck, which is in a stag, which is under a tree.
A seer finds the egg and sucks it. Then the warlock grows
as weak as a child, <q>for all his strength had passed into the
seer.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, p. 110.</note> A Servian story relates how a certain warlock called
True Steel carried off a prince's wife and kept her shut up
in his cave. But the prince contrived to get speech of her
and told her that she must persuade True Steel to reveal to
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
her where his strength lay. So when True Steel came home,
the prince's wife said to him, <q>Tell me, now, where is your
great strength?</q> He answered, <q>My wife, my strength is
in my sword.</q> Then she began to pray and turned to his
sword. When True Steel saw that, he laughed and said,
<q>O foolish woman! my strength is not in my sword, but in
my bow and arrows.</q> Then she turned towards the bow and
arrows and prayed. But True Steel said, <q>I see, my wife,
you have a clever teacher who has taught you to find out
where my strength lies. I could almost say that your
husband is living, and it is he who teaches you.</q> But
she assured him that nobody had taught her. When she
found he had deceived her again, she waited for some days
and then asked him again about the secret of his strength.
He answered, <q>Since you think so much of my strength, I
will tell you truly where it is. Far away from here there
is a very high mountain; in the mountain there is a fox; in
the fox there is a heart; in the heart there is a bird, and in
this bird is my strength. It is no easy task, however, to
catch the fox, for she can transform herself into a multitude
of creatures.</q> So next day, when True Steel went forth
from the cave, the prince came and learned from his wife
the true secret of the warlock's strength. So away he hied
to the mountain, and there, though the fox, or rather the
vixen, turned herself into various shapes, he managed with
the help of certain friendly eagles, falcons, and dragons,
to catch and kill her. Then he took out the fox's heart, and
out of the heart he took the bird and burned it in a great
fire. At that very moment True Steel fell down dead.<note place='foot'>Madam Csedomille Mijatovies,
<hi rend='italic'>Serbian Folk-lore</hi>, edited by the Rev.
W. Denton (London, 1874), pp. 167-172;
F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen und Märchen
der Südslaven</hi> (Leipsic, 1883-1884),
i. 164-169.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Servian
story of the
dragon of
the water-mill
whose
strength
was in a
pigeon. The fight
with the
dragon.</note>
In another Servian story we read how a dragon resided in
a water-mill and ate up two king's sons, one after the other.
The third son went out to seek his brothers, and coming to
the water-mill he found nobody in it but an old woman.
She revealed to him the dreadful character of the being
that kept the mill, and how he had devoured the prince's
two elder brothers, and she implored him to go away home
before the same fate should overtake him. But he was both
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
brave and cunning, and he said to her, <q>Listen well to what
I am going to say to you. Ask the dragon whither he goes
and where his strength is; then kiss all that place where he
tells you his strength is, as if from love, till you find it out,
and afterwards tell me when I come.</q> So when the dragon
came in, the old woman began to question him, <q>Where in
God's name have you been? Whither do you go so far?
You will never tell me whither you go.</q> The dragon
replied, <q>Well, my dear old woman, I do go far.</q> Then
the old woman coaxed him, saying, <q>And why do you go
so far? Tell me where your strength is. If I knew where
your strength is, I don't know what I should do for love; I
would kiss all that place.</q> Thereupon the dragon smiled
and said to her, <q>Yonder is my strength, in that fireplace.</q>
Then the old woman began to fondle and kiss the fireplace;
and the dragon on seeing it burst into a laugh. <q>Silly old
woman,</q> he said, <q>my strength is not there. It is in the
tree-fungus in front of the house.</q> Then the old woman
began to fondle and kiss the tree; but the dragon laughed
again and said to her, <q>Away, old woman! my strength is
not there.</q> <q>Then where is it?</q> asked the old woman.
<q>My strength,</q> said he, <q>is a long way off, and you cannot
go thither. Far in another kingdom under the king's city is
a lake; in the lake is a dragon; in the dragon is a boar; in
the boar is a pigeon, and in the pigeon is my strength.</q> The
murder was now out; so next morning when the dragon went
away from the mill to attend to his usual business of eating
people up, the prince came to the old woman and she let him
into the secret of the dragon's strength. The prince accordingly
set off to find the lake in the far country and the other
dragon that lived in it. He found them both at last; the lake
was a still and lonely water surrounded by green meadows,
where flocks of sheep nibbled the sweet lush grass. The
hero tucked up his hose and his sleeves, and wading out
into the lake called aloud on the dragon to come forth
and fight. Soon the monster emerged from the water,
slimy and dripping, his scaly back glistening in the morning
sun. The two grappled and wrestled from morning to
afternoon of a long summer day. What with the heat of
the weather and the violence of his exertions the dragon
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
was quite exhausted, and said, <q>Let me go, prince, that I
may moisten my parched head in the lake and toss
you to the sky.</q> But the prince sternly refused; so
the dragon relaxed his grip and sank under the water,
which bubbled and gurgled over the place where he
plunged into the depths. When he had disappeared and
the ripples had subsided on the surface, you would never
have suspected that under that calm water, reflecting the
green banks, the white, straying sheep, the blue sky, and the
fleecy gold-flecked clouds of a summer evening, there lurked
so ferocious and dangerous a monster. Next day the combat
was renewed with the very same result. But on the
third day the hero, fortified by a kiss from the fair daughter
of the king of the land, tossed the dragon high in air, and
when the monster fell with a most tremendous thud on the
water he burst into little bits. Out of the pieces sprang a
boar which ran away as fast as it could lay legs to the
ground. But the prince sent sheep-dogs after it which
caught it up and rent it in pieces. Out of the pieces sprang
a pigeon; but the prince let loose a falcon, which stooped
on the pigeon, seized it in its talons, and brought it to the
prince. In the pigeon was the life of the dragon who kept
the mill, so before inflicting on the monster the doom he
so richly merited, the prince questioned him as to the fate
of his two elder brothers who had perished at the hands, or
rather under the claws and fangs, of the dragon. Having
ascertained how to restore them to life and to release a
multitude of other victims whom the dragon kept prisoners
in a vault under the water-mill, the prince wrung the pigeon's
neck, and that of course was the end of the dragon and his
unscrupulous career.<note place='foot'>A. H. Wratislaw, <hi rend='italic'>Sixty Folk-tales from exclusively Slavonic Sources</hi> (London,
1889), pp. 224-231.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul
in a
Lithuanian
story.
The Soulless
King
whose soul
was in a
duck's egg. The Soulless
King.
The water
of life. The soul
in the
duck's egg.</note>
A Lithuanian story relates how a prince married a princess
and got with her a kingdom to boot. She gave him the keys
of the castle and told him he might enter every chamber
except one small room, of which the key had a bit of twine
tied to it. But one day, having nothing to do, he amused
himself by rummaging in all the rooms of the castle, and
amongst the rest he went into the little forbidden chamber.
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
In it he found twelve heads and a man hanging on the
hook of the door. The man said to the prince, <q>Oblige me
by fetching me a glass of beer.</q> The prince fetched it and
the man drank it. Then the man said to the prince, <q>Oblige
me by releasing me from the hook.</q> The prince released
him. Now the man was a king without a soul, and he at
once availed himself of his liberty to come to an understanding
with the coachman of the castle, and between them they
put the prince's wife in the coach and drove off with her.
The prince rode after them and coming up with the coach
called out, <q>Halt, Soulless King! Step out and fight!</q>
The King stepped out and the fight began. In a trice the
King had sliced the buttons off the prince's coat and pinked
him in the side. Then he stepped into the coach and drove off.
The prince rode after him again, and when he came up with
the coach he called out, <q>Halt, Soulless King! Step out
and fight!</q> The King stepped out and they fought again,
and again the King sliced off the prince's buttons and pinked
him in the side. Then, after carefully wiping and sheathing
his sword, he said to his discomfited adversary, <q>Now look
here. I let you off the first time for the sake of the glass of
beer you gave me, and I let you off the second time because
you let me down from that infernal hook; but if you fight
me a third time, by Gad I'll make mince meat of you.</q>
Then he stepped into the coach, told the coachman to
drive on, jerked up the coach window with a bang, and
drove away like anything. But the prince galloped after
him and coming up with the coach for the third time he
called out, <q>Halt, Soulless King! Step out and fight!</q>
The King did step out, and at it the two of them went, tooth
and nail. But the prince had no chance. Before he knew
where he was, the King ran him through the body, whisked
off his head, and left him lying a heap of raw mince beside
the road. His wife, or rather his widow, said to the King,
<q>Let me gather up the fragments that remain.</q> The King
said, <q>Certainly.</q> So she made up the mince into a neat
parcel, deposited it on the front seat of the coach, and away
they drove to the King's castle. Well to cut a long story
short, a brother-in-law of the deceased prince sent a hawk to
fetch the water of life; the hawk brought it in his beak;
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
the brother-in-law poured the water on the fragments of the
prince, and the prince came to life again at once safe and
sound. Then he went to the King's castle and played on a
little pipe, and his wife heard it in the castle and said, <q>That
is how my husband used to play, whom the King cut in bits.</q>
So she went out to the gate and said to him, <q>Are you my
husband?</q> <q>That I am,</q> said he, and he told her to find
out from the King where he kept his soul and then to come
and tell him. So she went to the King and said to him,
<q>Where my husband's soul is, there must mine be too.</q>
The King was touched by this artless expression of her love,
and he replied, <q>My soul is in yonder lake. In that lake
lies a stone; in that stone is a hare; in the hare is a duck,
in the duck is an egg, and in the egg is my soul.</q> So the
queen went and told her former husband, the prince, and gave
him plenty of money and food for the journey, and off he set
for the lake. But when he came to the lake, he did not
know in which part of it the stone was; so he roamed about
the banks, and he was hungry, for he had eaten up all the
food. Then he met a dog, and the dog said to him, <q>Don't
shoot me dead. I will be a mighty helper to you in your
time of need.</q> So he let the dog live and went on his way.
Next he saw a tree with two hawks on it, an old one and a
young one, and he climbed up the tree to catch the young
one. But the old hawk said to him, <q>Don't take my young
one. He will be a mighty helper to you in your time of
need.</q> So the prince climbed down the tree and went on
his way. Then he saw a huge crab and wished to break off
one of his claws for something to eat, but the crab said to
him, <q>Don't break off my claw. It will be a mighty helper
to you in your time of need.</q> So he left the crab alone and
went on his way. And he came to people and got them to
fish up the stone for him from the lake and to bring it to him
on the bank. And there he broke the stone in two and out
of the stone jumped a hare. But the dog seized the hare
and tore him, and out of the hare flew a duck. The young
hawk pounced on the duck and rent it, and out of the duck
fell an egg, and the egg rolled into the lake. But the crab
fetched the egg out of the lake and brought it to the prince.
Then the King fell ill. So the prince went to the King and
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
said, <q>You killed me. Now I will kill you.</q> <q>Don't,</q> said
the King. <q>I will,</q> said the prince. With that he threw
the egg on the ground, and the King fell out of the bed as
dead as a stone. So the prince went home with his wife and
very happy they were, you may take my word for it.<note place='foot'>A. Leskien und K. Brugmann,
<hi rend='italic'>Litauische Volkslieder und Märchen</hi>
(Strasburg, 1882), pp. 423-430; compare
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 569-571.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
Teutonic
stories.
Transylvanian
story of a
witch
whose life
was in a
light.
German
story of
Soulless
the
cannibal,
whose
soul was
in a box. The
helpful
animals.</note>
Amongst peoples of the Teutonic stock stories of the
external soul are not wanting. In a tale told by the Saxons
of Transylvania it is said that a young man shot at a witch
again and again. The bullets went clean through her but
did her no harm, and she only laughed and mocked at him.
<q>Silly earthworm,</q> she cried, <q>shoot as much as you like.
It does me no harm. For know that my life resides not in
me but far, far away. In a mountain is a pond, on the pond
swims a duck, in the duck is an egg, in the egg burns a
light, that light is my life. If you could put out that light,
my life would be at an end. But that can never, never be.</q>
However, the young man got hold of the egg, smashed it,
and put out the light, and with it the witch's life went out
also.<note place='foot'>Josef Haltrich, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Volksmärchen
aus dem Sachsenlande in
Siebenbürgen</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> (Vienna, 1885), No. 34
(No. 33 of the first edition), pp. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In this last story, as in many other stories of the same
type, the hero achieves his adventure by the help of certain
grateful animals whom he had met and done a service
to on his travels. The same incident occurs in another
German tale of this class which runs thus. Once upon a
time there was a young fellow called Body-without-Soul, or,
for short, Soulless, and he was a cannibal who would eat
nothing but young girls. Now it was a custom in that
country that the girls drew lots every year, and the one on
whom the lot fell was handed over to Soulless. In time it
happened that the lot fell on the king's daughter. The king
was exceedingly sorry, but what could he do? Law was
law, and had to be obeyed. So they took the princess to
the castle where Soulless resided; and he shut her up in the
larder and fattened her for his dinner. But a brave soldier
undertook to rescue her, and off he set for the cannibal's
castle. Well, as he trudged along, what should he see but
a fly, an eagle, a bear, and a lion sitting in a field by the
side of the road, and quarrelling about their shares in a
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
dead horse. So he divided the carcase fairly between them,
and as a reward the fly and the eagle bestowed on him the
power of changing himself at will into either of their shapes.
That evening he made himself into an eagle, and flew
up a high tree; there he looked about, but could see nothing
but trees. Next morning he flew on till he came to a great
castle, and at the gate was a big black board with these
words chalked up on it: <q>Mr. Soulless lives here.</q> When
the soldier read that he was glad, and changed himself into
a fly, and flew buzzing from window to window, looking in
at every one till he came to the one where the fair princess
sat a prisoner. He introduced himself at once and said, <q>I
am come to free you, but first you must learn where the soul
of Soulless really is.</q> <q>I don't know,</q> replied the princess,
<q>but I will ask.</q> So after much coaxing and entreaty she
learned that the soul of Soulless was in a box, and that the
box was on a rock in the middle of the Red Sea. When
the soldier heard that, he turned himself into an eagle again,
flew to the Red Sea, and came back with the soul of
Soulless in the box. Arrived at the castle he knocked and
banged at the door as if the house was on fire. Soulless
did not know what was the matter, and he came down and
opened the door himself. When he saw the soldier standing
at it, I can assure you he was in a towering rage. <q>What
do you mean,</q> he roared, <q>by knocking at my door like
that? I'll gobble you up on the spot, skin and hair and all.</q>
But the soldier laughed in his face. <q>You'd better not do
that,</q> said he, <q>for here I've got your soul in the box.</q> When
the cannibal heard that, all his courage went down into the
calves of his legs, and he begged and entreated the soldier
to give him his soul. But the soldier would not hear of it;
he opened the box, took out the soul, and flung it over his
head; and that same instant down fell the cannibal, dead as
a door-nail.<note place='foot'>J. W. Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Märchen und Sagen</hi> (Leipsic, 1845), No. 20, pp. 87-93.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>German
story of
flowers that
were life-tokens.</note>
Another German story, which embodies the notion of
the external soul in a somewhat different form, tells how
once upon a time a certain king had three sons and a
daughter, and for each of the king's four children there
grew a flower in the king's garden, which was a life-flower;
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
for it bloomed and flourished so long as the child lived, but
drooped and withered away when the child died. Now the
time came when the king's daughter married a rich man
and went to live with him far away. But it was not long
before her flower withered in the king's garden. So the
eldest brother went forth to visit his brother-in-law and comfort
him in his bereavement. But when he came to his
brother-in-law's castle he saw the corpse of his murdered
sister weltering on the ramparts. And his wicked brother-in-law
set before him boiled human hands and feet for his
dinner. And when the king's son refused to eat of them,
his brother-in-law led him through many chambers to a
murder-hole, where were all sorts of implements of murder,
but especially a gallows, a wheel, and a pot of blood. Here
he said to the prince, <q>You must die, but you may choose
your kind of death.</q> The prince chose to die on the
gallows; and die he did even as he had said. So the
eldest son's flower withered in the king's garden, and the
second son went forth to learn the fate of his brother
and sister. But it fared with him no better than with his
elder brother, for he too died on the gallows in the murder-hole
of his wicked brother-in-law's castle, and his flower also
withered away in the king's garden at home. Now when
the youngest son was also come to his brother-in-law's castle
and saw the corpse of his murdered sister weltering on the
ramparts, and the bodies of his two murdered brothers dangling
from the gallows in the murder-hole, he said that for his
part he had a fancy to die by the wheel, but he was not
quite sure how the thing was done, and would his brother-in-law
kindly shew him? <q>Oh, it's quite easy,</q> said his
brother-in-law, <q>you just put your head in, so,</q> and with
that he popped his head through the middle of the wheel.
<q>Just so,</q> said the king's youngest son, and he gave the
wheel a twirl, and as it spun round and round, the wicked
brother-in-law died a painful death, which he richly deserved.
And when he was quite dead, the murdered brothers and
sister came to life again, and their withered flowers bloomed
afresh in the king's garden.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>
(Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 306-308,
§ 622. In this story the flowers are
rather life-tokens than external souls.
The life-token has been carefully
studied by Mr. E. S. Hartland in the
second volume of his learned work
<hi rend='italic'>The Legend of Perseus</hi> (London, 1895).</note>
</p>

<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The warlock
in
the wood,
whose
heart was
in a bird.</note>
In another German story an old warlock lives with a
damsel all alone in the midst of a vast and gloomy
wood. She fears that being old he may die and leave
her alone in the forest. But he reassures her. <q>Dear
child,</q> he said, <q>I cannot die, and I have no heart in my
breast.</q> But she importuned him to tell her where his
heart was. So he said, <q>Far, far from here in an unknown
and lonesome land stands a great church. The church is
well secured with iron doors, and round about it flows a
broad deep moat. In the church flies a bird and in the bird
is my heart. So long as the bird lives, I live. It cannot
die of itself, and no one can catch it; therefore I cannot die,
and you need have no anxiety.</q> However the young man,
whose bride the damsel was to have been before the warlock
spirited her away, contrived to reach the church and catch
the bird. He brought it to the damsel, who stowed him and
it away under the warlock's bed. Soon the old warlock
came home. He was ailing, and said so. The girl wept
and said, <q>Alas, daddy is dying; he has a heart in his
breast after all.</q> <q>Child,</q> replied the warlock, <q>hold your
tongue. I <emph>can't</emph> die. It will soon pass over.</q> At that the
young man under the bed gave the bird a gentle squeeze;
and as he did so, the old warlock felt very unwell and sat
down. Then the young man gripped the bird tighter, and
the warlock fell senseless from his chair. <q>Now squeeze
him dead,</q> cried the damsel. Her lover obeyed, and when
the bird was dead, the old warlock also lay dead on the
floor.<note place='foot'>K. Müllenhoff, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Lieder der Herzogthümer Schleswig
Holstein und Lauenburg</hi> (Kiel, 1845),
pp. 404 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
Norse
stories.
The giant
whose
heart was
in a duck's
egg.</note>
In the Norse tale of <q>the giant who had no heart in his
body,</q> the giant tells the captive princess, <q>Far, far away in
a lake lies an island, on that island stands a church, in that
church is a well, in that well swims a duck, in that duck
there is an egg, and in that egg there lies my heart.</q> The
hero of the tale, with the help of some animals to whom
he had been kind, obtains the egg and squeezes it, at which
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
the giant screams piteously and begs for his life. But the
hero breaks the egg in pieces and the giant at once bursts.<note place='foot'>P. Chr. Asbjörnsen og J. Moe,
<hi rend='italic'>Norske Folke-Eventyr</hi> (Christiania,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), No. 36, pp. 174-180; G. W.
Dasent, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Tales from the Norse</hi>
(Edinburgh, 1859), pp. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
In another Norse story a hill-ogre tells the captive princess
that she will never be able to return home unless she finds
the grain of sand which lies under the ninth tongue of
the ninth head of a certain dragon; but if that grain of
sand were to come over the rock in which the ogres
live, they would all burst <q>and the rock itself would
become a gilded palace, and the lake green meadows.</q>
The hero finds the grain of sand and takes it to the
top of the high rock in which the ogres live. So all the
ogres burst and the rest falls out as one of the ogres had
foretold.<note place='foot'>P. Chr. Asbjörnsen, <hi rend='italic'>Norske Folke-Eventyr</hi>,
Ny Samling (Christiania,
1871), No. 70, pp. 35-40; G. W.
Dasent, <hi rend='italic'>Tales from the Fjeld</hi> (London,
1874), pp. 223-230 (<q>Boots and the
Beasts</q>). As in other tales of this
type, it is said that the hero found
three animals (a lion, a falcon, and an
ant) quarrelling over a dead horse, and
received from them the power of transforming
himself into animals of these
species as a reward for dividing the
carcase fairly among them.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
Danish
stories.
The warlock
whose
heart was
in a duck's
egg.
The
helpful
animals.</note>
In a Danish tale a warlock carries off a princess to
his wondrous subterranean palace; and when she anxiously
enquires how long he is likely to live, he assures her
that he will certainly survive her. <q>No man,</q> he says,
<q>can rob me of my life, for it is in my heart, and my
heart is not here; it is in safer keeping.</q> She urges
him to tell her where it is, so he says: <q>Very far from
here, in a land that is called Poland, there is a great lake,
and in the lake is a dragon, and in the dragon is a hare,
and in the hare is a duck, and in the duck is an egg,
and in the egg is my heart. It is in good keeping,
you may trust me. Nobody is likely to stumble upon it.</q>
However, the hero of the tale, who is also the husband
of the kidnapped princess, has fortunately received the
power of turning himself at will into a bear, a dog, an ant,
or a falcon as a reward for having divided the carcase of a
deer impartially between four animals of these species; and
availing himself of this useful art he not only makes his way
into the warlock's enchanted palace but also secures the egg
on which the enchanter's life depends. No sooner has he
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
smashed the egg on the enchanter's ugly face than that
miscreant drops down as dead as a herring.<note place='foot'>Svend Grundtvig, <hi rend='italic'>Dänische Volksmärchen</hi>,
übersetzt von A. Strodtmann,
Zweite Sammlung (Leipsic, 1879),
pp. 194-218.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Danish
story
of the
magician
whose
heart was
in a fish. The
magician's
heart.</note>
Another Danish story tells how a lad went out into the
world to look for service. He met a man, who hired him for
three years and said he would give him a bushel of money for
the first year, two bushels of money for the second, and three
bushels of money for the third. The lad was well content, as
you may believe, to get such good wages. But the man was a
magician, and it was not long before he turned the lad into
a hare, by pronouncing over him some strange words. For
a whole year the lad scoured the woods in the shape of a
hare, and there was not a sportsman in all the country
round about that had not a shot at him. But not one of
them could hit him. At the end of the year the magician
spoke some other words over him and turned him back
into human form and gave him the bushel of money. But
then the magician mumbled some other words, and the lad
was turned into a raven and flew up into the sky. Again
all the marksmen of the neighbourhood pointed their guns
at him and banged away; but they only wasted powder and
shot, for not one of them could hit him. At the end of the
year the magician changed him back into a man and gave
him two bushelfuls of money. But soon after he changed
him into a fish, and in the form of a fish the young man
jumped into the brook and swam down into the sea. There
at the bottom of the ocean he saw a most beautiful
castle all of glass and in it a lovely girl all alone. Round
and round the castle he swam, looking into all the rooms
and admiring everything. At last he remembered the
words the magician had spoken when he turned him back
into a man, and by repeating them he was at once transformed
into a stripling again. He walked into the glass
castle and introduced himself to the girl, and though at first
she was nearly frightened to death, she was soon very glad
to have him with her. From her he learned that she was
no other than the daughter of the magician, who kept her
there for safety at the bottom of the sea. The two now
laid their heads together, and she told him what to do.
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
There was a certain king who owed her father money and
had not the wherewithal to pay; and if he did not pay
by such and such a day, his head was to be cut off. So the
young man was to take service with the king, offer him the
bushels of money which he had earned in the service of the
magician, and go with him to the magician to pay his debt.
But he was to dress up as the court Fool so that the
magician would not know him, and in that character he was
to indulge in horse-play, smashing windows and so on, till
the magician would fall into such a rage that though the
king had paid his debt to the last farthing he would nevertheless
be condemned to instant execution unless he could
answer the magician's questions. The questions would be
these, <q>Where is my daughter?</q> <q>Would you know her
if you saw her?</q> Now the magician would cause a whole
line of phantom women to pass by, so that the young
man would not be able to tell which of them was the
sorcerer's daughter; but when her turn came to pass by she
would give him a nudge as a sign, and so he would know
her. Then the magician would ask, <q>And where is my
heart?</q> And the young man was to say, <q>In a fish.</q>
And the magician would ask, <q>Would you know the fish if
you saw it?</q> And he would cause all sorts of fishes to
pass by, and the young man would have to say in which of
them was the heart of the magician. He would never be
able of himself to tell in which of them it was, but the girl
would stand beside him, and when the right fish passed by,
she would nudge him and he was to catch it and rip it up,
and the magician would ask him no more questions. Everything
turned out exactly as she had said. The king paid
his debt to the last farthing; but the young man disguised
as the court Fool cut such capers and smashed so many
glass windows and doors that the heaps of broken glass
were something frightful to contemplate. So there was
nothing for it but that the king, who was of course responsible
for the pranks of his Fool, should either answer the
magician's questions or die the death. While they were
getting the axe and the block ready in the courtyard, the
trembling king was interrogated by the stern magician.
<q>Where is my daughter?</q> asked the sorcerer. Here the
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
court Fool cut in and said, <q>She is at the bottom of the sea.</q>
<q>Would you know her if you saw her?</q> enquired the
magician. <q>To be sure I would,</q> answered the Fool. So
the magician caused a whole regiment of girls to defile
before him, one after the other; but they were mere
phantoms and apparitions. Almost the last of all came the
magician's daughter, and when she passed the young man
she pinched his arm so hard that he almost shrieked with
pain. However, he dissembled his agony and putting his
arm round her waist held her fast. The magician now
played his last trump. <q>Where is my heart?</q> said he.
<q>In a fish,</q> said the Fool. <q>Would you know the fish if
you saw it?</q> asked the magician. <q>To be sure I would,</q>
answered the Fool. Then all the fishes of the sea swam
past, and when the right one came last of all, the girl
nudged her lover; he seized the fish, and with one stroke of
his knife slit it from end to end. Out tumbled the magician's
heart; the young man seized it and cut it in two, and at the
same moment the magician fell dead.<note place='foot'>Svend Grundtvig, <hi rend='italic'>Dänische Volksmärchen</hi>, übersetzt von Willibald Leo
(Leipsic, 1878), pp. 29-45.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
Icelandic
stories.
The king's
son in the
cave of the
giantesses
whose
life was
in an egg. The swans'
song. The life-egg.
An Icelandic
parallel to
Meleager.</note>
In Iceland they say that once a king's son was out
hunting in a wood with the courtiers, when the mist came
down so thick that his companions lost sight of the prince,
and though they searched the woods till evening they could
not find him. At the news the king was inconsolable, and
taking to his bed caused proclamation to be made that he
who could find and bring back his lost son should have half
the kingdom. Now an old man and his old wife lived
together in a wretched hut, and they had a daughter. She
resolved to seek the lost prince and get the promised reward.
So her parents gave her food for the journey and a pair of
new shoes, and off she set. Well, she walked and better
walked for days, and at last she came towards evening to a
cave and going into it she saw two beds. One of them was
covered with a cloth of silver and the other with a cloth of
gold; and in the bed with the golden coverlet was the king's
son fast asleep. She tried to wake him, but all in vain.
Then she noticed some runes carved on the bedsteads, but
she could not read them. So she went back to the mouth
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
of the cave and hid behind the door. Hardly had she time
to conceal herself when she heard a loud noise and saw two
giantesses, two great hulking louts they were, stride into the
cave. No sooner were they in than one said to the other,
<q>Ugh, what a smell of human flesh in our cave!</q> But the
other thought the smell might come from the king's son.
They went up to the bed where he was sleeping, and calling
two swans, which the girl had not perceived in the dim light
of the cave, they said:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Sing, sing, my swans,</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>That the king's son may wake.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
So the swans sang and the king's son awoke. The younger
of the two hags offered him food, but he refused it; then
she asked him, if he would marry her, but he said <q>No,
certainly not.</q> Then she shrieked and said to the swans:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Sing, sing, my swans,</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>That the king's son may sleep.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The swans sang and the king's son fell fast asleep. Then
the two giantesses lay down in the bed with the silver coverlet
and slept till break of day. When they woke in the morning,
they wakened the prince and offered him food again, but
he again refused it; and the younger hag again asked him
if he would have her to wife, but he would not hear of it.
So they put him to sleep again to the singing of the swans
and left the cave. When they were gone a while, the girl
came forth from her hiding-place and waked the king's son
to the song of the swans, and he was glad to see her and to
get the news. She told him that, when the hag asked him
again to marry her, he must say, <q>Yes, but you must first
tell me what is written on the beds, and what you do by day.</q>
So when it drew to evening, the girl hid herself again, and
soon the giantesses came, lit a fire in the cave, and cooked at
it the game they had brought with them. And the younger
hag wakened the king's son and asked him if he would have
something to eat. This time he said <q>Yes.</q> And when he
had finished his supper, the giantess asked him if he would
have her to wife. <q>That I will,</q> said he, <q>but first you must
tell me what the runes mean that are carved on the bed.</q>
She said that they meant:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Run, run, my little bed,</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Run whither I will.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
He said he was very glad to know it, but she must also tell
him what they did all day long out there in the wood. The
hag told him that they hunted beasts and birds, and that
between whiles they sat down under an oak and threw
their life-egg from one to the other, but they had to be
careful, for if the egg were to break, they would both die.
The king's son thanked her kindly, but next morning when
the giantess asked him to go with them to the wood he said
that he would rather stay at home. So away went the
giantesses by themselves, after they had lulled him to sleep
to the singing of the swans. But hardly were their backs
turned when out came the girl and wakened the prince and
told him to take his spear, and they would pursue the
giantesses, and when they were throwing their life-egg to
each other he was to hurl his spear at it and smash it to bits.
<q>But if you miss,</q> said she, <q>it is as much as your life
is worth.</q> So they came to the oak in the wood, and there
they heard a loud laugh, and the king's son climbed up the
tree, and there under the oak were the two giantesses, and
one of them had a golden egg in her hand and threw it to
the other. Just then the king's son hurled his spear and hit
the egg so that it burst. At the same time the two hags fell
dead to the ground and the slaver dribbled out of their
mouths.<note place='foot'>J. C. Poestion, <hi rend='italic'>Isländische Märchen</hi>
(Vienna, 1884), No. vii. pp. 49-55.
The same story is told with
minor variations by Konrad Maurer in
his <hi rend='italic'>Isländische Volkssagen der Gegenwart</hi>
(Leipsic, 1860), pp. 277-280.
In his version a giant and giantess,
brother and sister, have their life in
one stone, which they throw backwards
and forwards to each other;
when the stone is caught and broken
by the heroine, the giant and giantess
at once expire. The tale was told to
Maurer when he was crossing an arm
of the sea in a small boat; and the
waves ran so high and broke into the
boat so that he could not write the
story down at the time but had to
trust to his memory in recording it
afterwards.</note> In an Icelandic parallel to the story of Meleager
the spae-wives or sibyls come and foretell the high destiny
of the infant Gestr as he lies in his cradle. Two candles were
burning beside the child, and the youngest of the spae-wives,
conceiving herself slighted, cried out, <q>I foretell that the
child shall live no longer than this candle burns.</q> Whereupon
the chief sibyl put out the candle and gave it to Gestr's
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
mother to keep, charging her not to light it again until her
son should wish to die. Gestr lived three hundred years;
then he kindled the candle and expired.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische Mythen</hi>
(Berlin, 1858), p. 592; John
Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>Etymological Dictionary of
the Scottish Language</hi>, New Edition,
revised by J. Longmuir and D.
Donaldson (Paisley, 1879-1882), iv.
869, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Yule.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul
in Celtic
stories.
The giant
whose soul
was in a
duck's egg.</note>
The conception of the external soul meets us also in
Celtic stories. Thus a tale, told by a blind fiddler in the
island of Islay, relates how a giant carried off a king's wife
and his two horses and kept them in his den. But the horses
attacked the giant and mauled him so that he could hardly
crawl. He said to the queen, <q>If I myself had my soul to
keep, those horses would have killed me long ago.</q> <q>And
where, my dear,</q> said she, <q>is thy soul? By the books I
will take care of it.</q> <q>It is in the Bonnach stone,</q> said he.
So on the morrow when the giant went out, the queen set
the Bonnach stone in order exceedingly. In the dusk of the
evening the giant came back, and he said to the queen,
<q>What made thee set the Bonnach stone in order like that?</q>
<q>Because thy soul is in it,</q> quoth she. <q>I perceive,</q> said
he, <q>that if thou didst know where my soul is, thou wouldst
give it much respect.</q> <q>That I would,</q> said she. <q>It is
not there,</q> said he, <q>my soul is; it is in the threshold.</q> On
the morrow she set the threshold in order finely, and when
the giant returned, he asked her, <q>What brought thee to set
the threshold in order like that?</q> <q>Because thy soul is in
it,</q> said she. <q>I perceive,</q> said he, <q>that if thou knewest
where my soul is, thou wouldst take care of it.</q> <q>That I
would,</q> said she. <q>It is not there that my soul is,</q> said he.
<q>There is a great flagstone under the threshold. There is a
wether under the flag. There is a duck in the wether's belly,
and an egg in the belly of the duck, and it is in the egg that
my soul is.</q> On the morrow when the giant was gone, they
raised the flagstone and out came the wether. They opened
the wether and out came the duck. They split the duck,
and out came the egg. And the queen took the egg and
crushed it in her hands, and at that very moment the giant,
who was coming home in the dusk, fell down dead.<note place='foot'>J. F. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Tales of
the West Highlands</hi>, New Edition
(Paisley and London, 1890), i. 7-11.</note> In
another Celtic tale, a sea beast has carried off a king's
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
daughter, and an old smith declares that there is no way of
killing the beast but one. <q>In the island that is in the
midst of the loch is Eillid Chaisfhion&mdash;the white-footed
hind, of the slenderest legs, and the swiftest step, and though
she should be caught, there would spring a hoodie out of
her, and though the hoodie should be caught, there would
spring a trout out of her, but there is an egg in the mouth
of the trout, and the soul of the beast is in the egg, and if
the egg breaks, the beast is dead.</q> As usual the egg is
broken and the beast dies.<note place='foot'>J. F. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Tales of
the West Highlands</hi>, New Edition,
i. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The herdsman
of
Cruachan
and the
helpful
animals. The simple
giant and
the wily
woman.</note>
In these Celtic tales the helpful animals reappear and
assist the hero in achieving the adventure, though for the
sake of brevity I have omitted to describe the parts they
play in the plot. They figure also in an Argyleshire story,
which seems however to be of Irish origin; for the Cruachan
of which we hear in it is not the rugged and lofty mountain
Ben Cruachan which towers above the beautiful Loch Awe,
but Roscommon Cruachan near Belanagare, the ancient
palace of the kings of Connaught, long famous in Irish
tradition.<note place='foot'>Compare <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of
Soul</hi>, p. 12.</note> The story relates how a big giant, King of
Sorcha, stole away the wife and the shaggy dun filly of the
herdsman or king of Cruachan. So the herdsman baked a
bannock to take with him by the way, and set off in quest
of his wife and the filly. He went for a long, long time,
till at last his soles were blackened and his cheeks were
sunken, the yellow-headed birds were going to rest at the
roots of the bushes and the tops of the thickets, and the
dark clouds of night were coming and the clouds of day
were departing; and he saw a house far from him, but
though it was far from him he did not take long to reach it.
He went in, and sat in the upper end of the house, but there
was no one within; and the fire was newly kindled, the
house newly swept, and the bed newly made; and who
came in but the hawk of Glencuaich, and she said to him,
<q>Are you here, young son of Cruachan?</q> <q>I am,</q> said
he. The hawk said to him, <q>Do you know who was here
last night?</q> <q>I do not,</q> said he. <q>There were here,</q>
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
said she, <q>the big giant, King of Sorcha, your wife, and the
shaggy dun filly; and the giant was threatening terribly
that if he could get hold of you he would take the head off
you.</q> <q>I well believe it,</q> said he. Then she gave him
food and drink, and sent him to bed. She rose in the
morning, made breakfast for him, and baked a bannock for
him to take with him on his journey. And he went away
and travelled all day, and in the evening he came to another
house and went in, and was entertained by the green-headed
duck, who told him that the giant had rested there the night
before with the wife and shaggy dun filly of the herdsman
of Cruachan. And next day the herdsman journeyed again,
and at evening he came to another house and went in and
was entertained by the fox of the scrubwood, who told him
just what the hawk of Glencuaich and the green-headed
duck had told him before. Next day the same thing
happened, only it was the brown otter of the burn that
entertained him at evening in a house where the fire was
newly kindled, the floor newly swept, and the bed newly
made. And next morning when he awoke, the first
thing he saw was the hawk of Glencuaich, the green-headed
duck, the fox of the scrubwood, and the brown otter of the
burn all dancing together on the floor. They made breakfast
for him, and partook of it all together, and said to him,
<q>Should you be at any time in straits, think of us, and we
will help you.</q> Well, that very evening he came to the
cave where the giant lived, and who was there before him
but his own wife? She gave him food and hid him under
clothes at the upper end of the cave. And when the giant
came home he sniffed about and said, <q>The smell of a
stranger is in the cave.</q> But she said no, it was only a
little bird she had roasted. <q>And I wish you would tell
me,</q> said she, <q>where you keep your life, that I might take
good care of it.</q> <q>It is in a grey stone over there,</q> said
he. So next day when he went away, she took the grey
stone and dressed it well, and placed it in the upper end of
the cave. When the giant came home in the evening he
said to her, <q>What is it that you have dressed there?</q>
<q>Your own life,</q> said she, <q>and we must be careful of it.</q>
<q>I perceive that you are very fond of me, but it is not
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
there,</q> said he. <q>Where is it?</q> said she. <q>It is in a grey
sheep on yonder hillside,</q> said he. On the morrow, when
he went away, she got the grey sheep, dressed it well, and
placed it in the upper end of the cave. When he came
home in the evening he said, <q>What is it that you have
dressed there?</q> <q>Your own life, my love,</q> said she. <q>It
is not there as yet,</q> said he. <q>Well!</q> said she, <q>you are
putting me to great trouble taking care of it, and you have
not told me the truth these two times.</q> He then said, <q>I
think that I may tell it to you now. My life is below the
feet of the big horse in the stable. There is a place down
there in which there is a small lake. Over the lake are
seven grey hides, and over the hides are seven sods from
the heath, and under all these are seven oak planks. There
is a trout in the lake, and a duck in the belly of the trout,
an egg in the belly of the duck, and a thorn of blackthorn
inside of the egg, and till that thorn is chewed small I
cannot be killed. Whenever the seven grey hides, the seven
sods from the heath, and the seven oak planks are touched
I shall feel it wherever I shall be. I have an axe above
the door, and unless all these are cut through with one blow
of it the lake will not be reached; and when it will be
reached I shall feel it.</q> Next day, when the giant had
gone out hunting on the hill, the herdsman of Cruachan
contrived, with the help of the friendly animals&mdash;the hawk,
the duck, the fox, and the otter&mdash;to get possession of the
fateful thorn and to chew it before the giant could reach
him; and no sooner had he done so than the giant dropped
stark and stiff, a corpse.<note place='foot'>Rev. D. MacInnes, <hi rend='italic'>Folk and Hero Tales</hi> (London, 1890), pp. 103-121.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Argyleshire
story
of the
Bare-Stripping
Hangman
whose soul
was in a
duck's egg.</note>
Another Argyleshire story relates how a certain giant,
who lived in the Black Corrie of Ben Breck, carried off three
daughters of a king, one after the other, at intervals of seven
years. The bereaved monarch sent champions to rescue his
lost daughters, but though they surprised the giant in his
sleep and cut off his head, it was all to no purpose; for as
fast as they cut it off he put it on again and made after them
as if nothing had happened. So the champions fled away
before him as fast as they could lay legs to the ground, and
the more agile of them escaped, but the shorter-winded he
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
caught, bared them to the skin, and hanged them on hooks
against the turrets of his castle. So he went by the name
of the Bare-Stripping Hangman. Now this amiable man
had announced his intention of coming to fetch away the
fourth and last of the king's daughters, when another seven
years should be up. The time was drawing near, and the
king, with the natural instincts of a father, was in great
tribulation, when as good luck would have it a son of the
king of Ireland, by name Alastir, arrived in the king's castle
and undertook to find out where the Bare-Stripping Hangman
had hidden his soul. To cut a long story short, the
artful Hangman had hidden his soul in an egg, which was
in the belly of a duck, which was in the belly of a salmon,
which was in the belly of a swift-footed hind of the cliffs.
The prince wormed the secret from a little old man, and
by the help of a dog, a brown otter, and a falcon he contrived
to extract the egg from its various envelopes and
crushed it to bits between his hands and knees. So when
he came to the giant's castle he found the Bare-Stripping
Hangman lying dead on the floor.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdougall, <hi rend='italic'>Folk and
Hero Tales</hi> (London, 1891), pp. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition</hi>,
No. iii.).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Highland
story of
Headless
Hugh.</note>
Another Highland story sets forth how Hugh, prince of
Lochlin, was long held captive by a giant who lived in a
cave overlooking the Sound of Mull. At last, after he had
spent many years of captivity in that dismal cave, it came
to pass that one night the giant and his wife had a great
dispute, and Hugh overheard their talk, and learned that the
giant's soul was in a precious gem which he always wore on
his forehead. So the prince watched his opportunity, seized
the gem, and having no means of escape or concealment,
hastily swallowed it. Like lightning from the clouds, the
giant's sword flashed from its scabbard and flew between
Hugh's head and his body to intercept the gem before it
could descend into the prince's stomach. But it was too
late; and the giant fell down, sword in hand, and expired
without a gasp. Hugh had now lost his head, it is true,
but having the giant's soul in his body he felt none the
worse for the accident. So he buckled the giant's sword at
his side, mounted the grey filly, swifter than the east wind,
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
that never had a bridle, and rode home. But the want of
his head made a painful impression on his friends; indeed
they maintained that he was a ghost and shut the door
in his face, so now he wanders for ever in shades of
darkness, riding the grey filly fleeter than the wind. On
stormy nights, when the wind howls about the gables and
among the trees, you may see him galloping along the
shore of the sea <q>between wave and sand.</q> Many a
naughty little boy, who would not go quietly to bed, has
been carried off by Headless Hugh on his grey filly and
never seen again.<note place='foot'>Rev. James Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Religion
and Myth</hi> (London, 1893), pp. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
The writer tells us that in his youth a
certain old Betty Miles used to terrify
him with this tale. For the tradition
of Headless Hugh, who seems to have
been the only son of Hector, first chief
of Lochbuy, in the fourteenth century,
see J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1902),
pp. III <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> India also has its stories
of headless horsemen. See W. Crooke,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of
Northern India</hi> (London, 1896), i. 256
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Mackays
the
descendants
of
the seal.</note>
In Sutherlandshire at the present day there is a sept of
Mackays known as <q>the descendants of the seal,</q> who
claim to be sprung from a mermaid, and the story they tell
in explanation of their claim involves the notion of the
external soul. They say that the laird of Borgie used to go
down to the rocks under his castle to bathe. One day he
saw a mermaid close in shore, combing her hair and swimming
about, as if she were anxious to land. After watching
her for a time, he noticed her cowl on the rocks beside him,
and knowing that she could not go to sea without it, he
carried the cowl up to the castle in the hope that she would
follow him. She did so, but he refused to give up the cowl
and detained the sea-maiden herself and made her his wife.
To this she consented with great reluctance, and told him that
her life was bound up with the cowl, and that if it rotted or was
destroyed she would instantly die. So the cowl was placed
for safety in the middle of a great hay-stack, and there it
lay for years. One unhappy day, when the laird was from
home, the servants were working among the hay and found
the cowl. Not knowing what it was, they shewed it to the
lady of the house. The sight revived memories of her old
life in the depths of the sea, so she took the cowl, and
leaving her child in its cot, plunged into the sea and never
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
came home to Borgie any more. Only sometimes she
would swim close in shore to see her boy, and then she
wept because he was not of her own kind that she might
take him to sea with her. The boy grew to be a man, and
his descendants are famous swimmers. They cannot drown,
and to this day they are known in the neighbourhood as
<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Sliochd an roin</foreign>, that is, <q>the descendants of the seal.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. James Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Religion
and Myth</hi>, pp. 191 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, from information
furnished by the Rev. A. Mackay.
In North Uist there is a sept known as
<q>the MacCodrums of the seals.</q> and
a precisely similar legend is told to
explain their descent from seals. See
J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions of the
Highlands and Islands of Scotland</hi>
(Glasgow, 1900), p. 284.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul
in Irish
and Breton
stories.
The giant
and the
egg.
The
helpful
animals.
Body-without-Soul. The
helpful
animals.
The giant
whose life
was in a
box-tree.</note>
In an Irish story we read how a giant kept a beautiful
damsel a prisoner in his castle on the top of a hill, which
was white with the bones of the champions who had tried
in vain to rescue the fair captive. At last the hero, after
hewing and slashing at the giant all to no purpose, discovered
that the only way to kill him was to rub a mole on
the giant's right breast with a certain egg, which was in a
duck, which was in a chest, which lay locked and bound at
the bottom of the sea. With the help of some obliging
salmon, rams, and eagles, the hero as usual made himself
master of the precious egg and slew the giant by merely
striking it against the mole on his right breast.<note place='foot'>Jeremiah Curtin, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Folk-tales
of Ireland</hi> (London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 71
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Similarly
in a Breton story there figures a giant whom neither fire nor
water nor steel can harm. He tells his seventh wife, whom
he has just married after murdering all her predecessors, <q>I
am immortal, and no one can hurt me unless he crushes on
my breast an egg, which is in a pigeon, which is in the
belly of a hare; this hare is in the belly of a wolf, and this
wolf is in the belly of my brother, who dwells a thousand
leagues from here. So I am quite easy on that score.</q> A
soldier, the hero of the tale, had been of service to an ant,
a wolf, and a sea-bird, who in return bestowed on him the
power of turning himself into an ant, a wolf, or a sea-bird
at will. By means of this magical power the soldier contrived
to obtain the egg and crush it on the breast of the
giant, who immediately expired.<note place='foot'>P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires de
la Haute-Bretagne</hi> (Paris, 1885), pp.
63 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Another Breton story
tells of a giant who was called Body-without-Soul because
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
his life did not reside in his body. He himself dwelt in
a beautiful castle which hung between heaven and earth,
suspended by four golden chains; but his life was in an egg,
and the egg was in a dove, and the dove was in a hare, and
the hare was in a wolf, and the wolf was in an iron chest at
the bottom of the sea. In his castle in the air he kept
prisoner a beauteous princess whom he had swooped down
upon and carried off in a magic chariot. But her lover
turned himself into an ant and so climbed up one of the
golden chains into the enchanted castle, for he had done a
kindness to the king and queen of ants, and they rewarded
him by transforming him into an ant in his time of need.
When he had learned from the captive princess the secret of
the giant's life, he procured the chest from the bottom of the
sea by the help of the king of fishes, whom he had also
obliged; and opening the chest he killed first the wolf, then
the hare, and then the dove, and at the death of each animal
the giant grew weaker and weaker as if he had lost a limb.
In the stomach of the dove the hero found the egg on which
the giant's life depended, and when he came with it to the
castle he found Body-without-Soul stretched on his bed at
the point of death. So he dashed the egg against the
giant's forehead, the egg broke, and the giant straightway
expired.<note place='foot'>F. M. Luzel, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires de
Basse-Bretagne</hi> (Paris, 1887), i. 435-449.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Veillées Bretonnes</hi>
(Morlaix, 1879), pp. 133 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For two
other French stories of the same type,
taken down in Lorraine, see E. Cosquin,
<hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires de Lorraine</hi> (Paris,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), Nos. 15 and 50 (vol. i. pp. 166
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, vol. ii. pp. 128 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>). In both
of them there figures a miraculous beast
which can only be slain by breaking a
certain egg against its head; but we are
not told that the life of the beast was
in the egg. In both of them also the
hero receives from three animals, whose
dispute about the carcase of a dead
beast he has settled, the power of
changing himself into animals of the
same sort. See the remarks and comparisons
of the learned editor, Monsieur
E. Cosquin, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 170 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In another Breton tale the life of a giant resides
in an old box-tree which grows in his castle garden; and to
kill him it is necessary to sever the tap-root of the tree at a
single blow of an axe without injuring any of the lesser
roots. This task the hero, as usual, successfully accomplishes,
and at the same moment the giant drops dead.<note place='foot'>F. M. Luzel, <hi rend='italic'>Veillées Bretonnes</hi>
pp. 127 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul
in stories
of non-Aryan
peoples.
The ancient
Egyptian
story of
the Two
Brothers. The heart
in the
flower of
the Acacia.</note>
The notion of an external soul has now been traced in
folk-tales told by Aryan peoples from India to Brittany and
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
the Hebrides. We have still to shew that the same idea occurs
commonly in the popular stories of peoples who do not belong
to the Aryan stock. In the first place it appears in the ancient
Egyptian story of <q>The Two Brothers.</q> This story was
written down in the reign of Rameses II., about 1300 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
It is therefore older than our present redaction of Homer,
and far older than the Bible. The outline of the story,
so far as it concerns us here, is as follows. Once upon
a time there were two brethren; the name of the elder was
Anpu and the name of the younger was Bata. Now Anpu
had a house and a wife, and his younger brother dwelt with
him as his servant. It was Anpu who made the garments,
and every morning when it grew light he drove the kine
afield. As he walked behind them they used to say to
him, <q>The grass is good in such and such a place,</q> and he
heard what they said and led them to the good pasture that
they desired. So his kine grew very sleek and multiplied
greatly. One day when the two brothers were at work in
the field the elder brother said to the younger, <q>Run and
fetch seed from the village.</q> So the younger brother ran
and said to the wife of his elder brother, <q>Give me seed
that I may run to the field, for my brother sent me saying,
Tarry not.</q> She said, <q>Go to the barn and take as much as
thou wouldst.</q> He went and filled a jar full of wheat and
barley, and came forth bearing it on his shoulders. When
the woman saw him her heart went out to him, and she laid
hold of him and said, <q>Come, let us rest an hour together.</q>
But he said, <q>Thou art to me as a mother, and my brother
is to me as a father.</q> So he would not hearken to her, but
took the load on his back and went away to the field. In
the evening, when the elder brother was returning from the
field, his wife feared for what she had said. So she took
soot and made herself as one who had been beaten. And
when her husband came home, she said, <q>When thy younger
brother came to fetch seed, he said to me, Come, let us rest
an hour together. But I would not, and he beat me.</q>
Then the elder brother became like a panther of the south;
he sharpened his knife and stood behind the door of the
cow-house. And when the sun set and the younger brother
came laden with all the herbs of the field, as was his wont
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
every day, the cow that walked in front of the herd said to
him, <q>Behold, thine elder brother stands with a knife to kill
thee. Flee before him.</q> When he heard what the cow
said, he looked under the door of the cow-house and saw
the feet of his elder brother standing behind the door, his
knife in his hand. So he fled and his brother pursued him
with the knife. But the younger brother cried for help to
the Sun, and the Sun heard him and caused a great water
to spring up between him and his elder brother, and the
water was full of crocodiles. The two brothers stood, the
one on the one side of the water and the other on the other,
and the younger brother told the elder brother all that had
befallen. So the elder brother repented him of what he
had done and he lifted up his voice and wept. But he
could not come at the farther bank by reason of the
crocodiles. His younger brother called to him and said,
<q>Go home and tend the cattle thyself. For I will dwell no
more in the place where thou art. I will go to the Valley
of the Acacia. But this is what thou shalt do for me.
Thou shalt come and care for me, if evil befalls me, for I
will enchant my heart and place it on the top of the flower
of the Acacia; and if they cut the Acacia and my heart
falls to the ground, thou shalt come and seek it, and when
thou hast found it thou shalt lay it in a vessel of fresh
water. Then I shall come to life again. But this is the
sign that evil has befallen me; the pot of beer in thine hand
shall bubble.</q> So he went away to the Valley of the
Acacia, but his brother returned home with dust on his head
and slew his wife and cast her to the dogs.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bata in the
Valley of
the Acacia. How Bata
died and
was
brought to
life again.</note>
For many days afterwards the younger brother dwelt
alone in the Valley of the Acacia. By day he hunted the
beasts of the field, but at evening he came and laid him
down under the Acacia, on the top of whose flower was his
heart. And many days after that he built himself a house
in the Valley of the Acacia. But the gods were grieved
for him; and the Sun said to Khnumu, <q>Make a wife for
Bata, that he may not dwell alone.</q> So Khnumu made
him a woman to dwell with him, who was perfect in her
limbs more than any woman on earth, for all the gods were
in her. So she dwelt with him. But one day a lock of
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
her hair fell into the river and floated down to the land
of Egypt, to the house of Pharaoh's washerwomen. The
fragrance of the lock perfumed Pharaoh's raiment, and the
washerwomen were blamed, for it was said, <q>An odour of
perfume in the garments of Pharaoh!</q> So the heart of
Pharaoh's chief washerman was weary of the complaints
that were made every day, and he went to the wharf, and
there in the water he spied the lock of hair. He sent one
down into the river to fetch it, and, because it smelt sweetly,
he took it to Pharaoh. Then Pharaoh's magicians were
sent for and they said, <q>This lock of hair belongs to a
daughter of the Sun, who has in her the essence of all the
gods. Let messengers go forth to all foreign lands to seek
her.</q> So the woman was brought from the Valley of the
Acacia with chariots and archers and much people, and all
the land of Egypt rejoiced at her coming, and Pharaoh loved
her. But when they asked her of her husband, she said to
Pharaoh, <q>Let them cut down the Acacia and let them
destroy it.</q> So men were sent with tools to cut down the
Acacia. They came to it and cut the flower upon which
was the heart of Bata; and he fell down dead in that evil
hour. But the next day, when the earth grew light and
the elder brother of Bata was entered into his house and
had sat down, they brought him a pot of beer and it
bubbled, and they gave him a jug of wine and it grew
turbid. Then he took his staff and his sandals and hied
him to the Valley of the Acacia, and there he found his
younger brother lying dead in his house. So he sought
for the heart of his brother under the Acacia. For three
years he sought in vain, but in the fourth year he found it
in the berry of the Acacia. So he threw the heart into a
cup of fresh water. And when it was night and the heart
had sucked in much water, Bata shook in all his limbs and
revived. Then he drank the cup of water in which his
heart was, and his heart went into its place, and he lived as
before.<note place='foot'>(Sir) Gaston Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Contes
populaires de l'Égypte ancienne</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Paris,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. M. Flinders
Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Egyptian Tales</hi>, Second Series
(London, 1895), pp. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Alfred
Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Altägyptische Sagen und
Märchen</hi> (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 58-77.
Compare W. Mannhardt, <q>Das
älteste Märchen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>,
iv. (1859) pp. 232-259. The manuscript
of the story, which is now in the
British Museum, belonged to an Egyptian
prince, who was afterwards King
Seti II. and reigned about the year
1300 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> It is beautifully written
and in almost perfect condition.</note>
</p>

<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
Arabian
stories.
The jinnee
and the
sparrow. The ogress
and the
bottle.</note>
In the <hi rend='italic'>Arabian Nights</hi> we read how Seyf el-Mulook,
after wandering for four months over mountains and hills
and deserts, came to a lofty palace in which he found the
lovely daughter of the King of India sitting alone on a
golden couch in a hall spread with silken carpets. She tells
him that she is held captive by a jinnee, who had swooped
down on her and carried her off while she was disporting
herself with her female slaves in a tank in the great garden
of her father the king. Seyf el-Mulook then offers to smite
the jinnee with the sword and slay him. <q>But,</q> she replied,
<q>thou canst not slay him unless thou kill his soul.</q> <q>And
in what place,</q> said he, <q>is his soul?</q> She answered, <q>I
asked him respecting it many times; but he would not
confess to me its place. It happened, however, that I urged
him, one day, and he was enraged against me, and said to
me, <q>How often wilt thou ask me respecting my soul?
What is the reason of thy question respecting my soul?</q>
So I answered him, <q>O Hátim, there remaineth to me no one
but thee, excepting God; and I, as long as I live, would
not cease to hold thy soul in my embrace; and if I do not
take care of thy soul, and put it in the midst of my eye,
how can I live after thee? If I knew thy soul, I would
take care of it as of my right eye.</q> And thereupon he said
to me, <q>When I was born, the astrologers declared that the
destruction of my soul would be effected by the hand of one
of the sons of the human kings. I therefore took my soul,
and put it into the crop of a sparrow, and I imprisoned the
sparrow in a little box, and put this into another small box,
and this I put within seven other small boxes, and I put
these within seven chests, and the chests I put into a coffer
of marble within the verge of this circumambient ocean; for
this part is remote from the countries of mankind, and none
of mankind can gain access to it.</q></q> But Seyf el-Mulook got
possession of the sparrow and strangled it, and the jinnee
fell upon the ground a heap of black ashes.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Thousand and One Nights,
commonly called, in England, The
Arabian Nights' Entertainments</hi>, translated
by E. W. Lane (London, 1839-1841),
iii. 339-345.</note> In a modern
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
Arabian tale a king marries an ogress, who puts out the
eyes of the king's forty wives. One of the blinded queens
gives birth to a son whom she names Mohammed the Prudent.
But the ogress queen hated him and compassed his death.
So she sent him on an errand to the house of her kinsfolk
the ogres. In the house of the ogres he saw some things
hanging from the roof, and on asking a female slave what
they were, she said, <q>That is the bottle which contains the
life of my lady the queen, and the other bottle beside it
contains the eyes of the queens whom my mistress blinded.</q>
A little afterwards he spied a beetle and rose to kill it.
<q>Don't kill it,</q> cried the slave, <q>for that is my life.</q> But
Mohammed the Prudent watched the beetle till it entered
a chink in the wall; and when the female slave had fallen
asleep, he killed the beetle in its hole, and so the slave died.
Then Mohammed took down the two bottles and carried
them home to his father's palace. There he presented himself
before the ogress queen and said, <q>See, I have your life
in my hand, but I will not kill you till you have replaced
the eyes which you took from the forty queens.</q> The ogress
did as she was bid, and then Mohammed the Prudent said,
<q>There, take your life.</q> But the bottle slipped from his
hand and fell, the life of the ogress escaped from it, and she
died.<note place='foot'>G. Spitta-Bey, <hi rend='italic'>Contes arabes
modernes</hi> (Leyden and Paris, 1883),
No. 2, pp. 12 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The story in its
main outlines is identical with the
Cashmeer story of <q>The Ogress Queen</q>
(J. H. Knowles, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales of Kashmir</hi>,
pp. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) and the Bengalee story of
<q>The Boy whom Seven Mothers
Suckled</q> (Lal Behari Day, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales
of Bengal</hi>, pp. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>,
i. 170 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>). In another Arabian
story the life of a witch is bound up
with a phial; when it is broken, she
dies (W. A. Clouston, <hi rend='italic'>A Group of
Eastern Romances and Stories</hi>, Privately
printed, 1889, p. 30). A similar incident
occurs in a Cashmeer story
(J. H. Knowles, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 73). In the
Arabian story mentioned in the text,
the hero, by a genuine touch of local
colour, is made to drink the milk of
an ogress's breasts and hence is regarded
by her as her son. The same incident
occurs in Kabyle and Berber tales.
See J. Rivière, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires de la
Kabylie du Djurdjura</hi> (Paris, 1882),
p. 239; R. Basset, <hi rend='italic'>Nouveaux Contes
Berbères</hi> (Paris, 1897), p. 128, with
the editor's note, pp. 339 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In a
Mongolian story a king refuses to kill
a lad because he has unwittingly partaken
of a cake kneaded with the milk
of the lad's mother (B. Jülg, <hi rend='italic'>Mongolische
Märchen-Sammlung, die neun
Märchen des Siddhi-Kür</hi>, Innsbruck,
1868, p. 183). Compare W. Robertson
Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Kinship and Marriage in
Early Arabia</hi>, New Edition (London,
1903), p. 176; and for the same mode
of creating kinship among other races,
see A. d'Abbadie, <hi rend='italic'>Douze ans dans la
Haute Ethiopie</hi> (Paris, 1868), pp. 272 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Tausch, <q>Notices of the Circassians,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>,
i. (1834) p. 104; J. Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes
of the Hindoo Koosh</hi> (London, 1880),
pp. 77, 83 (compare G. W. Leitner,
<hi rend='italic'>Languages and Races of Dardistan</hi>,
Lahore, 1878, p. 34); Denzil C. J.
Ibbetson, <hi rend='italic'>Settlement Report of the
Panipat, Tahsil, and Karnal Parganah
of the Karnal District</hi> (Allahabad,
1883), p. 101; J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume
du Cambodge</hi> (Paris, 1883), i. 427; F. S.
Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte und Brauch der Südslaven</hi>
(Vienna, 1885), p. 14; J. H. Weeks,
<hi rend='italic'>Among Congo Cannibals</hi> (London,
1913), p. 132. When the Masai of
East Africa make peace with an enemy,
each tribe brings a cow with a calf and
a woman with a baby. The two cows
are exchanged, and the enemy's child
is suckled at the breast of the Masai
woman, and the Masai baby is suckled
at the breast of the woman belonging
to the enemy. See A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The
Masai</hi> (Oxford, 1905), pp. 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul
in Basque,
Kabyle,
and
Magyar
stories.</note>
A Basque story, which closely resembles some of the
stories told among Aryan peoples, relates how a monster&mdash;a
Body-without-Soul&mdash;detains a princess in captivity, and is
questioned by her as to how he might be slain. With some
reluctance he tells her, <q>You must kill a terrible wolf which
is in the forest, and inside him is a fox, in the fox is a
pigeon; this pigeon has an egg in his head, and whoever
should strike me on the forehead with this egg would kill
me.</q> The hero of the story, by name Malbrouk, has learned,
in the usual way, the art of turning himself at will into
a wolf, an ant, a hawk, or a dog, and on the strength of
this accomplishment he kills the animals, one after the
other, and extracts the precious egg from the pigeon's
head. When the wolf is killed, the monster feels it and says
despondently, <q>I do not know if anything is going to happen
to me. I am much afraid of it.</q> When the fox and the
pigeon have been killed, he cries that it is all over with him,
that they have taken the egg out of the pigeon, and that he
knows not what is to become of him. Finally the princess
strikes the monster on the forehead with the egg, and he falls
a corpse.<note place='foot'>W. Webster, <hi rend='italic'>Basque Legends</hi>
(London, 1877), pp. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. Vinson,
<hi rend='italic'>Le folk-lore du pays Basque</hi> (Paris,
1883), pp. 84 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> As so often in tales
of this type, the hero is said to have
received his wonderful powers of metamorphosis
from animals whom he found
quarrelling about their shares in a dead
beast.</note> In a Kabyle story an ogre declares that his fate
is far away in an egg, which is in a pigeon, which is in a
camel, which is in the sea. The hero procures the egg and
crushes it between his hands, and the ogre dies.<note place='foot'>J. Rivière, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires de la
Kabylie du Djurdjura</hi> (Paris, 1882),
p. 191.</note> In a
Magyar folk-tale, an old witch detains a young prince called
Ambrose in the bowels of the earth. At last she confided
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
to him that she kept a wild boar in a silken meadow, and if
it were killed, they would find a hare inside, and inside the
hare a pigeon, and inside the pigeon a small box, and inside
the box one black and one shining beetle: the shining beetle
held her life, and the black one held her power; if these two
beetles died, then her life would come to an end also. When
the old hag went out, Ambrose killed the wild boar, and took
out the hare; from the hare he took the pigeon, from the
pigeon the box, and from the box the two beetles; he killed
the black beetle, but kept the shining one alive. So the
witch's power left her immediately, and when she came home,
she had to take to her bed. Having learned from her how
to escape from his prison to the upper air, Ambrose killed
the shining beetle, and the old hag's spirit left her at once.<note place='foot'>W. H. Jones and L. L. Kropf,
<hi rend='italic'>The Folk-tales of the Magyar</hi> (London,
1889), pp. 205 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In another Hungarian story the safety of the Dwarf-king
resides in a golden cockchafer, inside a golden cock, inside
a golden sheep, inside a golden stag, in the ninety-ninth
island. The hero overcomes all these golden animals and
so recovers his bride, whom the Dwarf-king had carried off.<note place='foot'>R. H. Busk, <hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore of Rome</hi>
(London, 1874), p. 168.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul
in a Lapp
story.
The giant
whose life
was in a
hen's egg. The
helpful
animals.</note>
A Lapp story tells of a giant who slew a man and took
away his wife. When the man's son grew up, he tried to
rescue his mother and kill the giant, but fire and sword were
powerless to harm the monster; it seemed as if he had no
life in his body. <q>Dear mother,</q> at last enquired the son,
<q>don't you know where the giant has hidden away his life?</q>
The mother did not know, but promised to ask. So one
day, when the giant chanced to be in a good humour,
she asked him where he kept his life. He said to her,
<q>Out yonder on a burning sea is an island, in the island is
a barrel, in the barrel is a sheep, in the sheep is a hen, in the
hen is an egg, and in the egg is my life.</q> When the woman's
son heard this, he hired a bear, a wolf, a hawk, and a diver-bird
and set off in a boat to sail to the island in the burning sea.
He sat with the hawk and the diver-bird under an iron tent in
the middle of the boat, and he set the bear and the wolf to
row. That is why to this day the bear's hair is dark brown
and the wolf has dark-brown spots; for as they sat at the
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
oars without any screen they were naturally scorched by
the tossing tongues of flame on the burning sea. However,
they made their way over the fiery billows to the island, and
there they found the barrel. In a trice the bear had knocked
the bottom out of it with his claws, and forth sprang a sheep.
But the wolf soon pulled the sheep down and rent it in pieces.
From out the sheep flew a hen, but the hawk stooped on it and
tore it with his talons. In the hen was an egg, which dropped
into the sea and sank; but the diver-bird dived after it.
Twice he dived after it in vain and came up to the surface
gasping and spluttering; but the third time he brought up
the egg and handed it to the young man. Great was the
young man's joy. At once he kindled a great bonfire on
the shore, threw the egg into it, and rowed away back across
the sea. On landing he went away straight to the giant's
abode, and found the monster burning, just as he had left the
egg burning on the island. <q>Fool that I was,</q> lamented
the dying giant, <q>to betray my life to a wicked old woman,</q>
and with that he snatched at an iron tube through which in
happier days he had been wont to suck the blood of his
human victims. But the woman was too subtle for him, for
she had taken the precaution of inserting one end of the
tube in the glowing embers of the hearth; and so, when the
giant sucked hard at the other end, he imbibed only fire and
ashes. Thus he burned inside as well as outside, and when
the fire went out the giant's life went out with it.<note place='foot'>F. Liebrecht, <q>Lappländische
Märchen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, N.R., iii. (1870)
pp. 174 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. C. Poestion, <hi rend='italic'>Lappländische
Märchen</hi> (Vienna, 1886),
No. 20, pp. 81 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
Samoyed
and
Kalmuck
stories.</note>
A Samoyed story tells how seven warlocks killed a certain
man's mother and carried off his sister, whom they kept to
serve them. Every night when they came home the seven
warlocks used to take out their hearts and place them in a
dish which the woman hung on the tent-poles. But the
wife of the man whom they had wronged stole the hearts of
the warlocks while they slept, and took them to her husband.
By break of day he went with the hearts to the warlocks,
and found them at the point of death. They all begged for
their hearts; but he threw six of their hearts to the ground,
and six of the warlocks died. The seventh and eldest warlock
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
begged hard for his heart and the man said, <q>You
killed my mother. Make her alive again, and I will give
you back your heart.</q> The warlock said to his wife, <q>Go
to the place where the dead woman lies. You will find a
bag there. Bring it to me. The woman's spirit is in the
bag.</q> So his wife brought the bag; and the warlock said
to the man, <q>Go to your dead mother, shake the bag and
let the spirit breathe over her bones; so she will come to life
again.</q> The man did as he was bid, and his mother was
restored to life. Then he hurled the seventh heart to the
ground, and the seventh warlock died.<note place='foot'>A. Castren, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnologische Vorlesungen
über die altaischen Völker</hi> (St.
Petersburg, 1857), pp. 173 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In a Kalmuck tale
we read how a certain khan challenged a wise man to shew
his skill by stealing a precious stone on which the khan's life
depended. The sage contrived to purloin the talisman
while the khan and his guards slept; but not content with
this he gave a further proof of his dexterity by bonneting
the slumbering potentate with a bladder. This was too
much for the khan. Next morning he informed the sage
that he could overlook everything else, but that the indignity
of being bonneted with a bladder was more than he could
stand; and he ordered his facetious friend to instant execution.
Pained at this exhibition of royal ingratitude, the
sage dashed to the ground the talisman which he still held
in his hand; and at the same instant blood flowed from the
nostrils of the khan, and he gave up the ghost.<note place='foot'>B. Jülg, <hi rend='italic'>Kalmückische Märchen</hi>
(Leipsic, 1866), No. 12, pp. 58 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul
in Tartar
poems.</note>
In a Tartar poem two heroes named Ak Molot and
Bulat engage in mortal combat. Ak Molot pierces his foe
through and through with an arrow, grapples with him, and
dashes him to the ground, but all in vain, Bulat could not
die. At last when the combat has lasted three years, a
friend of Ak Molot sees a golden casket hanging by a white
thread from the sky, and bethinks him that perhaps this
casket contains Bulat's soul. So he shot through the white
thread with an arrow, and down fell the casket. He opened
it, and in the casket sat ten white birds, and one of the birds
was Bulat's soul. Bulat wept when he saw that his soul was
found in the casket. But one after the other the birds were
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
killed, and then Ak Molot easily slew his foe.<note place='foot'>Anton Schiefner, <hi rend='italic'>Heldensagen der
Minussinschen Tataren</hi> (St. Petersburg,
1859), pp. 172-176.</note> In another
Tartar poem, two brothers going to fight two other brothers
take out their souls and hide them in the form of a white
herb with six stalks in a deep pit. But one of their foes
sees them doing so and digs up their souls, which he puts
into a golden ram's horn, and then sticks the ram's horn in
his quiver. The two warriors whose souls have thus been
stolen know that they have no chance of victory, and accordingly
make peace with their enemies.<note place='foot'>A. Schiefner, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 108-112.</note> In another Tartar
poem a terrible demon sets all the gods and heroes at defiance.
At last a valiant youth fights the demon, binds him hand
and foot, and slices him with his sword. But still the demon
is not slain. So the youth asked him, <q>Tell me, where is
your soul hidden? For if your soul had been hidden in your
body, you must have been dead long ago.</q> The demon
replied, <q>On the saddle of my horse is a bag. In the bag
is a serpent with twelve heads. In the serpent is my soul.
When you have killed the serpent, you have killed me also.</q>
So the youth took the saddle-bag from the horse and killed
the twelve-headed serpent, whereupon the demon expired.<note place='foot'>A. Schiefner, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 360-364;
A. Castren, <hi rend='italic'>Vorlesungen über die
finnische Mythologie</hi> (St. Petersburg,
1857), pp. 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In another Tartar poem a hero called Kök Chan deposits
with a maiden a golden ring, in which is half his strength.
Afterwards when Kök Chan is wrestling long with a hero
and cannot kill him, a woman drops into his mouth the ring
which contains half his strength. Thus inspired with fresh
force he slays his enemy.<note place='foot'>A. Schiefner, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 189-193.
In another Tartar poem (Schiefner,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 390 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) a boy's soul is shut
up by his enemies in a box. While
the soul is in the box, the boy is dead;
when it is taken out, he is restored to
life. In the same poem (p. 384) the
soul of a horse is kept shut up in a
box, because it is feared the owner of
the horse will become the greatest
hero on earth. But these cases are,
to some extent, the converse of those
in the text.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in a
Mongolian
story and
Tartar
poems.</note>
In a Mongolian story the hero Joro gets the better of
his enemy the lama Tschoridong in the following way. The
lama, who is an enchanter, sends out his soul in the form of
a wasp to sting Joro's eyes. But Joro catches the wasp in
his hand, and by alternately shutting and opening his hand
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
he causes the lama alternately to lose and recover consciousness.<note place='foot'>Schott, <q>Ueber die Sage von
Geser-Chan,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der königlichen
Akademie der Wissenschaften zu
Berlin</hi>, 1851, p. 269.</note>
In a Tartar poem two youths cut open the body of
an old witch and tear out her bowels, but all to no purpose,
she still lives. On being asked where her soul is, she
answers that it is in the middle of her shoe-sole in the form
of a seven-headed speckled snake. So one of the youths
slices her shoe-sole with his sword, takes out the speckled
snake, and cuts off its seven heads. Then the witch dies.<note place='foot'>W. Radloff, <hi rend='italic'>Proben der Volkslitteratur
der türkischen Stämme Süd-Sibiriens</hi>,
ii. (St. Petersburg, 1868),
pp. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Another Tartar poem describes how the hero Kartaga
grappled with the Swan-woman. Long they wrestled.
Moons waxed and waned and still they wrestled; years
came and went, and still the struggle went on. But the
piebald horse and the black horse knew that the Swan-woman's
soul was not in her. Under the black earth flow
nine seas; where the seas meet and form one, the sea comes
to the surface of the earth. At the mouth of the nine seas
rises a rock of copper; it rises to the surface of the ground,
it rises up between heaven and earth, this rock of copper.
At the foot of the copper rock is a black chest, in the black
chest is a golden casket, and in the golden casket is the soul
of the Swan-woman. Seven little birds are the soul of the
Swan-woman; if the birds are killed the Swan-woman will
die straightway. So the horses ran to the foot of the copper
rock, opened the black chest, and brought back the golden
casket. Then the piebald horse turned himself into a bald-headed
man, opened the golden casket, and cut off the heads
of the seven birds. So the Swan-woman died.<note place='foot'>W. Radloff, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 531 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In a Tartar
story a chief called Tash Kan is asked where his soul is.
He answers that there are seven great poplars, and under
the poplars a golden well; seven <foreign rend='italic'>Maralen</foreign> (?) come to drink
the water of the well, and the belly of one of them trails on the
ground; in this <foreign rend='italic'>Maral</foreign> is a golden box, in the golden box
is a silver box, in the silver box are seven quails, the head
of one of the quails is golden and its tail silver; that quail
is Tash Kan's soul. The hero of the story gets possession
of the seven quails and wrings the necks of six of them.
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
Then Tash Kan comes running and begs the hero to let
his soul go free. But the hero wrings the last quail's neck,
and Tash Kan drops dead.<note place='foot'>W. Radloff, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iv. (St. Petersburg,
1872) pp. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another Tartar poem the hero,
pursuing his sister who has driven away his cattle, is warned
to desist from the pursuit because his sister has carried away
his soul in a golden sword and a golden arrow, and if he
pursues her she will kill him by throwing the golden sword
or shooting the golden arrow at him.<note place='foot'>W. Radloff, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. (St. Petersburg,
1866) pp. 345 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
a Chinese
story.</note>
A modern Chinese story tells how an habitual criminal used
to take his soul out of his own body for the purpose of evading
the righteous punishment of his crimes. This bad man lived
in Khien (Kwei-cheu), and the sentences that had been passed
on him formed a pile as high as a hill. The mandarins had
flogged him to death with sticks and flung his mangled
corpse into the river, but three days afterwards the scoundrel
got his soul back again, and on the fifth day he resumed
his career of villainy as if nothing had happened. The thing
occurred again and again, till at last it reached the ears of
the Governor of the province, who flew into a violent passion
and proposed to the Governor-General to have the rascal
beheaded. And beheaded he was; but in three days the
wretch was alive again with no trace of decapitation about
him except a slender red thread round his neck. And now,
like a giant refreshed, he began a fresh series of enormities.
He even went so far as to beat his own mother. This was
more than she could bear, and she brought the matter before
the magistrate. She produced in court a vase and said,
<q>In this vase my refractory son has hidden his soul. Whenever
he was conscious of having committed a serious crime,
or a misdeed of the most heinous kind, he remained at
home, took his soul out of his body, purified it, and put it
in the vase. Then the authorities only punished or executed
his body of flesh and blood, and not his soul. With his
soul, refined by a long process, he then cured his freshly
mutilated body, which thus became able in three days to
recommence in the old way. Now, however, his crimes
have reached a climax, for he has beaten me, an old woman,
and I cannot bear it. I pray you, smash this vase, and
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
scatter his soul by fanning it away with a windwheel; and if
then you castigate his body anew, it is probable that bad
son of mine will really die.</q> The mandarin took the hint.
He had the rogue cudgelled to death, and when they
examined the corpse they found that decay had set in within
ten days.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious System of China</hi>, iv. (Leyden, 1901)
pp. 105 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
a story told
by the
Khasis
of Assam.</note>
The Khasis of Assam tell of a certain Kyllong, king of
Madur, who pursued his conquests on a remarkable principle.
He needed few or no soldiers, because he himself was a very
strong man and nobody could kill him permanently; they
could, it is true, put him to death, but then he came to life
again immediately. The king of Synteng, who was much
afraid of him, once chopped him in pieces and threw the
severed hands and feet far away, thinking thus to get rid of
him for good and all; but it was to no purpose. The very
next morning Kyllong came to life again and stalked about
as brisk as ever. So the king of Synteng was very anxious
to learn how his rival contrived thus to rise from the dead;
and he hit on a plan for worming out the secret. He chose
the fairest girl of the whole country, clad her in royal robes,
put jewels of gold and silver upon her, and said, <q>All these
will I give thee and more besides, if thou canst obtain for me
King Kyllong's secret, and canst inform me how he brings
himself to life again after being killed.</q> So he sent the girl
to the slave-market in King Kyllong's country; and the
king saw and loved her and took her to wife. So she
caressed him and coaxed him to tell her his secret, and in
a fatal hour he was beguiled into revealing it. He said,
<q>My life depends upon these things. I must bathe every
day and must wash my entrails. After that, I take my
food, and there is no one on earth who can kill me unless
he obtains possession of my entrails. Thus my life hangs
only on my entrails.</q> His treacherous wife at once sent
word to the king of Synteng, who caused men to lie in wait
while Kyllong was bathing. As usual, Kyllong had laid his
entrails on one side of the bathing-place, while he disported
himself in the water, intending afterwards to wash them
and replace them in his body. But before he could do so,
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
one of the liers-in-wait had seized the entrails and killed
him. The entrails he cut in pieces and gave to the dogs
to eat. That was the end of King Kyllong. He was never
able to come to life again; his country was conquered, and
the members of the royal family were scattered far and
wide. Seven generations have passed since then.<note place='foot'>Major P. R. T. Gurdon, <hi rend='italic'>The Khasis</hi> (London, 1907), pp. 181-184.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
a Malay
poem.
Bidasari
and the
golden fish.</note>
A Malay poem relates how once upon a time in the city
of Indrapoora there was a certain merchant who was rich
and prosperous, but he had no children. One day as he
walked with his wife by the river they found a baby girl,
fair as an angel. So they adopted the child and called her
Bidasari. The merchant caused a golden fish to be made,
and into this fish he transferred the soul of his adopted
daughter. Then he put the golden fish in a golden box full
of water, and hid it in a pond in the midst of his garden.
In time the girl grew to be a lovely woman. Now the
King of Indrapoora had a fair young queen, who lived in
fear that the king might take to himself a second wife. So,
hearing of the charms of Bidasari, the queen resolved to put
her out of the way. She lured the girl to the palace and
tortured her cruelly; but Bidasari could not die, because her
soul was not in her. At last she could stand the torture no
longer and said to the queen, <q>If you wish me to die, you
must bring the box which is in the pond in my father's
garden.</q> So the box was brought and opened, and there
was the golden fish in the water. The girl said, <q>My soul
is in that fish. In the morning you must take the fish out
of the water, and in the evening you must put it back into
the water. Do not let the fish lie about, but bind it round
your neck. If you do this, I shall soon die.</q> So the queen
took the fish out of the box and fastened it round her neck;
and no sooner had she done so, than Bidasari fell into a
swoon. But in the evening, when the fish was put back
into the water, Bidasari came to herself again. Seeing that
she thus had the girl in her power, the queen sent her home
to her adopted parents. To save her from further persecution
her parents resolved to remove their daughter from the
city. So in a lonely and desolate spot they built a house
and brought Bidasari thither. There she dwelt alone, undergoing
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
vicissitudes that corresponded with the vicissitudes
of the golden fish in which was her soul. All day long,
while the fish was out of the water, she remained unconscious;
but in the evening, when the fish was put into
the water, she revived. One day the king was out hunting,
and coming to the house where Bidasari lay unconscious,
was smitten with her beauty. He tried to waken her, but
in vain. Next day, towards evening, he repeated his visit,
but still found her unconscious. However, when darkness
fell, she came to herself and told the king the secret of her
life. So the king returned to the palace, took the fish from
the queen, and put it in water. Immediately Bidasari
revived, and the king took her to wife.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <q>De betrekking
tusschen menschen- dieren- en plantenleven
naar het volksgeloof,</q> <hi rend='italic'>De Indische
Gids</hi>, November 1884, pp. 600-602;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>De Simsonsage,</q> <hi rend='italic'>De Gids</hi>, 1888,
No. 5, pp. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (of the separate reprint);
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Verspreide Geschriften</hi> (The
Hague, 1912), iii. 296-298, 559-561.
Compare L. de Backer, <hi rend='italic'>L'Archipel
Indien</hi> (Paris, 1874), pp. 144-149.
The Malay text of the long poem was
published with a Dutch translation and
notes by W. R. van Hoëvell (<q>Sjaïr
Bidasari, een oorspronkelijk Maleisch
Gedicht, uitgegeven en van eene Vertaling
en Aanteekeningen voorzien,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>,
xix. (Batavia, 1843) pp. 1-421).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
a story told
in Nias.</note>
Another story of an external soul comes from Nias, an
island to the west of Sumatra. Once on a time a chief was
captured by his enemies, who tried to put him to death but
failed. Water would not drown him nor fire burn him nor
steel pierce him. At last his wife revealed the secret. On
his head he had a hair as hard as a copper wire; and with
this wire his life was bound up. So the hair was plucked
out, and with it his spirit fled.<note place='foot'>J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B.
von Rosenberg, <q>Verslag omtrent het
eiland Nias,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxx. (Batavia, 1863)
p. 111; H. Sundermann, <q>Die Insel
Nias,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>,
xi. (1884) p. 453; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die Insel Nias
und die Mission daselbst</hi> (Barmen,
1905), p. 71. Compare E. Modigliani,
<hi rend='italic'>Un Viaggio a Nías</hi> (Milan, 1890),
p. 339.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
a Hausa
story.
The king
whose life
was in a
box. The helpful
animals.</note>
A Hausa story from Northern Nigeria closely resembles
some of the European tales which we have noticed; for it
contains not only the incident of the external soul, but also
the incident of the helpful animals, by whose assistance the
hero is able to slay the Soulless King and obtain possession
of the kingdom. The story runs thus. A certain man and
his wife had four daughters born to them in succession, but
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
every one of the baby girls mysteriously disappeared on the
day when she was to be weaned; so the parents fell under the
suspicion of having devoured them. Last of all there was
born to them a son, who to avoid accidents was left to wean
himself. One day, as he grew up, the son received a magic
lotion from an old woman, who told him to rub his eyes with
it. He did so, and immediately he saw a large house and
entering it he found his eldest sister married to a bull. She
bade him welcome and so did her husband the bull; and
when he went away, the bull very kindly presented him with
a lock of his hair as a keepsake. In like manner the lad
discovered his other three sisters, who were living in wedlock
with a ram, a dog, and a hawk respectively. All of them
welcomed him and from the ram, the dog, and the hawk he
received tokens of regard in the shape of hair or feathers.
Then he returned home and told his parents of his adventure
and how he had found his sisters alive and married. Next
day he went to a far city, where he made love to the Queen
and persuaded her to plot with him against the life of the
King her husband. So she coaxed the King to shew his
affection for her by <q>taking his own life, and joining it to
hers.</q> The unsuspecting husband, as usual, fell into the
trap set for him by his treacherous wife. He confided to
her the secret of his life. <q>My life,</q> said he, <q>is behind the
city, behind the city in a thicket. In this thicket there is a
lake; in the lake is a rock; in the rock is a gazelle; in the
gazelle is a dove; and in the dove is a small box.</q> The
Queen divulged the secret to her lover, who kindled a fire
behind the city and threw into it the hair and feathers which
he had received from the friendly animals, his brothers-in-law.
Immediately the animals themselves appeared and readily
gave their help in the enterprise. The bull drank up the
lake; the ram broke up the rock; the dog caught the
gazelle; the hawk captured the dove. So the youth
extracted the precious box from the dove and repaired to the
palace, where he found the King already dead. His Majesty
had been ailing from the moment when the young man left
the city, and he grew steadily worse with every fresh success
of the adventurer who was to supplant him. So the hero
became King and married the false Queen; and his sisters'
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
husbands were changed from animals into men and received
subordinate posts in the government. The hero's parents,
too, came to live in the city over which he reigned.<note place='foot'>Major A. J. N. Tremearne, <hi rend='italic'>Hausa
Superstitions and Customs</hi> (London,
1913), pp. 131 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The original Hausa
text of the story appears to be printed
in Major Edgar's <hi rend='italic'>Litafi na Tatsuniyoyi
na Hausa</hi> (ii. 27), to which Major
Tremearne refers (p. 9).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
a South
Nigerian
story.
The external
soul in
a story
told by the
Ba-Ronga
of South
Africa.
The Clan
of the Cat.</note>
A West African story from Southern Nigeria relates
how a king kept his soul in a little brown bird, which perched
on a tall tree beside the gate of the palace. The king's life
was so bound up with that of the bird that whoever should
kill the bird would simultaneously kill the king and succeed
to the kingdom. The secret was betrayed by the queen to
her lover, who shot the bird with an arrow and thereby slew
the king and ascended the vacant throne.<note place='foot'>Major A. G. Leonard, <hi rend='italic'>The Lower
Niger and its Tribes</hi> (London, 1906),
pp. 319-321.</note> A tale told by
the Ba-Ronga of South Africa sets forth how the lives of a
whole family were contained in one cat. When a girl of the
family, named Titishan, married a husband, she begged her
parents to let her take the precious cat with her to her new
home. But they refused, saying, <q>You know that our life is
attached to it</q>; and they offered to give her an antelope or
even an elephant instead of it. But nothing would satisfy
her but the cat. So at last she carried it off with her and
shut it up in a place where nobody saw it; even her husband
knew nothing about it. One day, when she went to work
in the fields, the cat escaped from its place of concealment,
entered the hut, put on the warlike trappings of the husband,
and danced and sang. Some children, attracted by the noise,
discovered the cat at its antics, and when they expressed
their astonishment, the animal only capered the more and
insulted them besides. So they went to the owner and said,
<q>There is somebody dancing in your house, and he insulted
us.</q> <q>Hold your tongues,</q> said he, <q>I'll soon put a stop to
your lies.</q> So he went and hid behind the door and peeped
in, and there sure enough was the cat prancing about and
singing. He fired at it, and the animal dropped down dead.
At the same moment his wife fell to the ground in the field
where she was at work; said she, <q>I have been killed at
home.</q> But she had strength enough left to ask her husband
to go with her to her parents' village, taking with him the
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
dead cat wrapt up in a mat. All her relatives assembled,
and bitterly they reproached her for having insisted on taking
the animal with her to her husband's village. As soon as
the mat was unrolled and they saw the dead cat, they all
fell down lifeless one after the other. So the Clan of the
Cat was destroyed; and the bereaved husband closed the
gate of the village with a branch, and returned home, and
told his friends how in killing the cat he had killed the whole
clan, because their lives depended on the life of the cat. In
another Ronga story the lives of a whole clan are attached
to a buffalo, which a girl of the clan in like manner insists
on taking with her.<note place='foot'>Henri A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>Les Chants et les
Contes des Ba-ronga</hi> (Lausanne, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>),
pp. 253-256; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Life of a South
African Tribe</hi> (Neuchatel, 1912-1913),
i. 338 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul in
stories told
by the
North
American
Indians. The ogress
whose life
was in a
hemlock
branch.</note>
Ideas of the same sort meet us in stories told by the
North American Indians. Thus in one Indian tale the hero
pounds his enemy to pieces, but cannot kill him because his
heart is not in his body. At last the champion learns that
his foe's heart is in the sky, at the western side of the noonday
sun; so he reaches up, seizes the heart, and crushes it,
and straightway his enemy expires. In another Indian myth
there figures a personage Winter whose song brings frost
and snow, but his heart is hidden away at a distance.
However, his foe finds the heart and burns it, and so the
Snow-maker perishes.<note place='foot'>J. Curtin, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Folk-tales of
the Russians, Western Slavs, and
Magyars</hi> (London, 1891), p. 551.
The writer does not mention his
authorities.</note> A Pawnee story relates how a
wounded warrior was carried off by bears, who healed him
of his hurts. When the Indian was about to return to his
village, the old he-bear said to him, <q>I shall look after you.
I shall give you a part of myself. If I am killed, you
shall be killed. If I grow old, you shall be old.</q> And the
bear gave him a cap of bearskin, and at parting he put his
arms round the Indian and hugged him, and put his mouth
against the man's mouth and held the man's hands in his
paws. The Indian who told the tale conjectured that when
the man died, the old bear died also.<note place='foot'>G. B. Grinnell, <hi rend='italic'>Pawnee Hero
Stories and Folk-tales</hi> (New York,
1889), pp. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <q>The Bear Man.</q></note> The Navajoes tell of
a certain mythical being called <q>the Maiden that becomes a
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
Bear,</q> who learned the art of turning herself into a bear from
the prairie wolf. She was a great warrior and quite
invulnerable; for when she went to war she took out her
vital organs and hid them, so that no one could kill her;
and when the battle was over she put the organs back in
their places again.<note place='foot'>Washington Matthews, <q>The
Mountain Chant: a Navajo Ceremony,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1887), pp.
406 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Kwakiutl Indians of British
Columbia tell of an ogress, who could not be killed because
her life was in a hemlock branch. A brave boy met her in
the woods, smashed her head with a stone, scattered her
brains, broke her bones, and threw them into the water.
Then, thinking he had disposed of the ogress, he went into
her house. There he saw a woman rooted to the floor, who
warned him, saying, <q>Now do not stay long. I know that
you have tried to kill the ogress. It is the fourth time that
somebody has tried to kill her. She never dies; she has
nearly come to life. There in that covered hemlock branch
is her life. Go there, and as soon as you see her enter,
shoot her life. Then she will be dead.</q> Hardly had she
finished speaking when sure enough in came the ogress,
singing as she walked:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>I have the magical treasure,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>I have the supernatural power,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>I can return to life.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Such was her song. But the boy shot at her life, and she
fell dead to the floor.<note place='foot'>Franz Boas, <q>The Social Organization
and the Secret Societies of the
Kwakiutl Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of the
United States National Museum for
1895</hi> (Washington, 1897), p. 373.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI. The External Soul in Folk-Custom.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The External Soul in Inanimate Things.'/>
<head>§ 1. The External Soul in Inanimate Things.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The external
soul
in folk-custom.</note>
Thus the idea that the soul may be deposited for a longer
or shorter time in some place of security outside the body,
or at all events in the hair, is found in the popular tales of
many races. It remains to shew that the idea is not a
mere figment devised to adorn a tale, but is a real article of
primitive faith, which has given rise to a corresponding set
of customs.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The soul
removed
from the
body as a
precaution
in seasons
of danger.
Souls of
people
collected
in a bag
at a house-warming. Soul of a
woman put
in a chopping-knife
at childbirth.</note>
We have seen that in the tales the hero, as a preparation
for battle, sometimes removes his soul from his body, in
order that his body may be invulnerable and immortal in
the combat. With a like intention the savage removes his
soul from his body on various occasions of real or imaginary
peril. Thus among the people of Minahassa in Celebes,
when a family moves into a new house, a priest collects the
souls of the whole family in a bag, and afterwards restores
them to their owners, because the moment of entering a new
house is supposed to be fraught with supernatural danger.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</hi>, pp. 63 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In Southern Celebes, when a woman is brought to bed, the
messenger who fetches the doctor or the midwife always
carries with him something made of iron, such as a chopping-knife,
which he delivers to the doctor. The doctor must
keep the thing in his house till the confinement is over, when
he gives it back, receiving a fixed sum of money for doing so.
The chopping-knife, or whatever it is, represents the woman's
soul, which at this critical time is believed to be safer out of
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
her body than in it. Hence the doctor must take great
care of the object; for were it lost, the woman's soul would
assuredly, they think, be lost with it.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi> (The
Hague, 1875), p. 54.</note> But in Celebes the
convenience of occasionally depositing the soul in some
external object is apparently not limited to human beings.
The Alfoors, or Toradjas, who inhabit the central district of
that island, and among whose industries the working of
iron occupies a foremost place, attribute to the metal a soul
which would be apt to desert its body under the blows of
the hammer, if some means were not found to detain it.
Accordingly in every smithy of Poso&mdash;for that is the name
of the country of these people&mdash;you may see hanging up
a bundle of wooden instruments, such as chopping-knives,
swords, spear-heads, and so forth. This bundle goes by the
name of <foreign rend='italic'>lamoa</foreign>, which is the general word for <q>gods,</q> and in
it the soul of the iron that is being wrought in the smithy
is, according to one account, supposed to reside. <q>If we
did not hang the <foreign rend='italic'>lamoa</foreign> over the anvil,</q> they say, <q>the iron
would flow away and be unworkable,</q> on account of the
absence of the soul.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander aangaande
het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xxxix.
(1895) pp. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Van Paloppo
naar Posso,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege
het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlii. (1898) p. 72. As to the
<foreign rend='italic'>lamoa</foreign> in general, see A. C. Kruijt,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> xl. (1896) pp. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> However, according to another interpretation
these wooden models are substitutes offered to the
gods in room of the iron, whose soul the covetous deities
might otherwise abstract for their own use, thus making the
metal unmalleable.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Het koppensnellen
der Toradja's van Midden-Celebes,
en zijne beteekenis,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verslagen
en Mededeelingen der koninklijke
Akademie der Wetenschappen</hi>, Afdeeling
Letterkunde, iv. Reeks, iii. (Amsterdam,
1899) pp. 201 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Het ijzer in Midden-Celebes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch- Indië</hi>, liii.
(1901) pp. 156 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Both the interpretations
in the text appear to be
inferences drawn by Mr. Kruijt from
the statement of the natives, that, if
they did not hang up these wooden
models in the smithy, <q>the iron would
flow away and be unworkable</q> (<q><foreign lang='nl' rend='italic'>zou
het ijzer vervloeien en onbewerkbaar
worden</foreign></q>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Soul of a
child put
for safety
in an empty
coco-nut
or a bag. Souls of
people in
ornaments,
horns, a
column,
and so
forth. The souls
of Egyptian
kings
in portrait
statues.
A man's
life bound
up with the
fire in his
lodge.</note>
Among the Dyaks of Pinoeh, a district of South-Eastern
Borneo, when a child is born, a medicine-man is sent for,
who conjures the soul of the infant into half a coco-nut,
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
which he thereupon covers with a cloth and places on a
square platter or charger suspended by cords from the roof.
This ceremony he repeats at every new moon for a year.<note place='foot'>A. H. B. Agerbeek, <q>Enkele
gebruiken van de Dajaksche bevolking
der Pinoehlanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
li. (1909) pp. 447 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The intention of the ceremony is not explained by the
writer who describes it, but we may conjecture that it is to
place the soul of the child in a safer place than its own frail
little body. This conjecture is confirmed by the reason
assigned for a similar custom observed elsewhere in the
Indian Archipelago. In the Kei Islands, when there is a
newly-born child in a house, an empty coco-nut, split and
spliced together again, may sometimes be seen hanging
beside a rough wooden image of an ancestor. The soul of
the infant is believed to be temporarily deposited in the
coco-nut in order that it may be safe from the attacks of
evil spirits; but when the child grows bigger and stronger,
the soul will take up its permanent abode in its own body.
Similarly among the Esquimaux of Alaska, when a child is
sick, the medicine-man will sometimes extract its soul from
its body and place it for safe-keeping in an amulet, which
for further security he deposits in his own medicine-bag. <note place='foot'>J. A. Jacobsen, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen in die
Inselwelt des Banda-Meeres</hi> (Berlin,
1896), p. 199.</note>
It seems probable that many amulets have been similarly
regarded as soul-boxes, that is, as safes in which the souls
of the owners are kept for greater security.<note place='foot'>In a long list of female ornaments
the prophet Isaiah mentions (iii. 20)
<q>houses of the soul</q>
(בת הנפש) or (שפנה תב),
which modern scholars suppose to have been
perfume boxes, as the Revised English
Version translates the phrase. The
name, literally translated <q>houses of
the soul,</q> suggests that these trinkets
were amulets of the kind mentioned in
the text. See my article, <q>Folk-lore
in the Old Testament,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropological
Essays presented to E. B. Tylor</hi>
(Oxford, 1907), pp. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In
ancient Egyptian tombs there are often
found plaques or palettes of schist
bearing traces of paint; some of them
are decorated with engravings of animals
or historical scenes, others are
modelled in the shape of animals of
various sorts, such as antelopes, hippopotamuses,
birds, tortoises, and fish.
As a rule only one such plaque is
found in a tomb, and it lies near the
hands of the mummy. It has been
conjectured by M. Jean Capart that
these plaques are amulets or soul-boxes,
in which the external souls of
the dead were supposed to be preserved.
See Jean Capart, <hi rend='italic'>Les Palettes
en schiste de L'Égypte primitive</hi> (Brussels,
1908), pp. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 19 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
(separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Revue des
Questions Scientifiques</hi>, avril, 1908).
For a full description of these plaques
or palettes, see Jean Capart, <hi rend='italic'>Les Débuts
de l'Art en Égypte</hi> (Brussels, 1904),
pp. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 221 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> An old
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
Mang'anje woman in the West Shire district of British
Central Africa used to wear round her neck an ivory ornament,
hollow, and about three inches long, which she called
her life or soul (<foreign rend='italic'>moyo wanga</foreign>). Naturally, she would not
part with it; a planter tried to buy it of her, but in vain.<note place='foot'>Miss Alice Werner, in a letter to
the author, dated 25th September
1899. Miss Werner knew the old
woman. Compare <hi rend='italic'>Contemporary Review</hi>,
lxx. (July-December 1896), p. 389,
where Miss Werner describes the
ornament as a rounded peg, tapering
to a point, with a neck or notch at
the top.</note>
When Mr. James Macdonald was one day sitting in the house
of a Hlubi chief, awaiting the appearance of that great man,
who was busy decorating his person, a native pointed to a
pair of magnificent ox-horns, and said, <q>Ntame has his soul
in these horns.</q> The horns were those of an animal which
had been sacrificed, and they were held sacred. A magician
had fastened them to the roof to protect the house and its
inmates from the thunder-bolt. <q>The idea,</q> adds Mr.
Macdonald, <q>is in no way foreign to South African thought.
A man's soul there may dwell in the roof of his house, in a
tree, by a spring of water, or on some mountain scaur.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. James Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Religion
and Myth</hi> (London, 1893), p. 190.
Compare Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential
Kafir</hi> (London, 1904), p. 83: <q>The
natives occasionally fix ox-horns in
their roofs and say that the spirit of
the chief lives in these horns and protects
the hut; these horns also protect
the hut from lightning, though not in
virtue of their spiritual connections.
(They are also used simply as ornaments.)</q>
No doubt amulets often
degenerate into ornaments.</note>
Among the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain
there is a secret society which goes by the name of Ingniet
or Ingiet. On his entrance into it every man receives a stone
in the shape either of a human being or of an animal, and
henceforth his soul is believed to be knit up in a manner
with the stone. If it breaks, it is an evil omen for him;
they say that the thunder has struck the stone and that he
who owns it will soon die. If nevertheless the man survives
the breaking of his soul-stone, they say that it was not a
proper soul-stone and he gets a new one instead.<note place='foot'>R. Thurnwald, <q>Im Bismarckarchipel
und auf den Salomo-inseln,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>, xlii. (1910)
p. 136. As to the Ingniet, Ingiet, or
Iniet Society see P. A. Kleintitschen,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel</hi>
(Hiltrup bei Münster, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>),
pp. 354 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Dreissig
Jahre in der Südsee</hi> (Stuttgart, 1907),
pp. 598 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The
emperor Romanus Lecapenus was once informed by an
astronomer that the life of Simeon, prince of Bulgaria, was
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
bound up with a certain column in Constantinople, so that
if the capital of the column were removed, Simeon would
immediately die. The emperor took the hint and removed
the capital, and at the same hour, as the emperor learned by
enquiry, Simeon died of heart disease in Bulgaria.<note place='foot'>G. Cedrenus, <hi rend='italic'>Historiarum Compendium</hi>,
p. 625B, vol. ii. p. 308, ed.
Im. Bekker (Bonn, 1838-1839).</note> The
deified kings of ancient Egypt appear to have enjoyed the
privilege of depositing their spiritual doubles or souls (<foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign>)
during their lifetime in a number of portrait statues, properly
fourteen for each king, which stood in the chamber of
adoration (<foreign rend='italic'>pa douaït</foreign>) of the temple and were revered as the
equivalents or representatives of the monarchs themselves.<note place='foot'>Alexandre Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Du caractère
religieux de la Royauté Pharaonique</hi>
(Paris, 1902), pp. 224 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> As to the
Egyptian doctrine of the spiritual
double or soul (<foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign>), see A. Wiedemann,
<hi rend='italic'>The Ancient Egyptian Doctrine
of the Immortality of the Soul</hi> (London,
1895), pp. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die
ägyptische Religion</hi> (Berlin, 1905),
p. 88; A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Mystères Égyptiens</hi>
(Paris, 1913), pp. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Among the Karens of Burma <q>the knife with which the
navel string is cut is carefully preserved for the child. The
life of the child is supposed to be in some way connected
with it, for, if lost or destroyed, it is said the child will not
be long lived.</q><note place='foot'>F. Mason, <q>Physical Character of
the Karens,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal</hi>, 1866, Part ii. No. 1,
p. 9.</note> Among the Shawnee Indians of North
America it once happened that an eminent man was favoured
with a special revelation by the Great Spirit. Wisely refusing
to hide the sacred light of revelation under a bushel, he
generously communicated a few sparks of the illumination
to John Tanner, a white man who lived for many years as an
Indian among the Indians. <q>Henceforth,</q> said the inspired
sage, <q>the fire must never be suffered to go out in your
lodge. Summer and winter, day and night, in the storm,
or when it is calm, you must remember that the life in your
body, and the fire in your lodge, are the same, and of the
same date. If you suffer your fire to be extinguished, at
that moment your life will be at its end.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A Narrative of the Captivity and
Adventures of John Tanner, during
Thirty Years' Residence among the
Indians</hi>, prepared for the press by
Edwin James, M.D. (London, 1830),
pp. 155 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The passage has been
already quoted by Sir John Lubbock
(Lord Avebury) in his <hi rend='italic'>Origin of Civilisation</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
(London, 1882), p. 241.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Strength
of people
supposed
to reside in
their hair.</note>
Again, we have seen that in folk-tales a man's soul or
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
strength is sometimes represented as bound up with his hair,
and that when his hair is cut off he dies or grows weak.
So the natives of Amboyna used to think that their strength
was in their hair and would desert them if it were shorn.
A criminal under torture in a Dutch Court of that island
persisted in denying his guilt till his hair was cut off, when
he immediately confessed. One man, who was tried for
murder, endured without flinching the utmost ingenuity of
his torturers till he saw the surgeon standing with a pair of
shears. On asking what this was for, and being told that
it was to cut his hair, he begged they would not do it, and
made a clean breast. In subsequent cases, when torture
failed to wring a confession from a prisoner, the Dutch
authorities made a practice of cutting off his hair.<note place='foot'>François Valentijn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud en Nieuw
Oost-Indiën</hi> (Dordrecht and Amsterdam,
1724-1726), ii. 143 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. A.
Wilken, <q>De Simsonsage,</q> <hi rend='italic'>De Gids</hi>,
1888, No. 5, pp. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (of the separate
reprint); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Verspreide Geschriften</hi>
(The Hague, 1912), iii. 569 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
Ceram it is still believed that if young people have their hair
cut they will be weakened and enervated thereby.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi> (The Hague, 1886), p. 137.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Witches
and
wizards
shaved to
deprive
them of
their
power.</note>
Here in Europe it used to be thought that the maleficent
powers of witches and wizards resided in their hair, and that
nothing could make any impression on these miscreants so
long as they kept their hair on. Hence in France it was
customary to shave the whole bodies of persons charged with
sorcery before handing them over to the torturer. Millaeus
witnessed the torture of some persons at Toulouse, from
whom no confession could be wrung until they were stripped
and completely shaven, when they readily acknowledged the
truth of the charge. A woman also, who apparently led a
pious life, was put to the torture on suspicion of witchcraft,
and bore her agonies with incredible constancy, until complete
depilation drove her to admit her guilt. The noted
inquisitor Sprenger contented himself with shaving the head
of the suspected witch or wizard; but his more thorough-going
colleague Cumanus shaved the whole bodies of forty-one
women before committing them all to the flames. He
had high authority for this rigorous scrutiny, since Satan
himself, in a sermon preached from the pulpit of North
Berwick church, comforted his many servants by assuring
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
them that no harm could befall them <q>sa lang as their hair
wes on, and sould newir latt ane teir fall fra thair ene.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. Dalyell, <hi rend='italic'>The darker Superstitions
of Scotland</hi> (Edinburgh, 1834),
pp. 637-639; C. de Mensignac, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches
ethnographiques sur la Salive
et le Crachat</hi> (Bordeaux, 1892), p. 49
note.</note>
Similarly in Bastar, a province of India, <q>if a man is adjudged
guilty of witchcraft, he is beaten by the crowd, his
hair is shaved, the hair being supposed to constitute his
power of mischief, his front teeth are knocked out, in order,
it is said, to prevent him from muttering incantations....
Women suspected of sorcery have to undergo the same
ordeal; if found guilty, the same punishment is awarded,
and after being shaved, their hair is attached to a tree in
some public place.</q><note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), ii. 281.</note> So among the Bhils of India, when
a woman was convicted of witchcraft and had been subjected
to various forms of persuasion, such as hanging head downwards
from a tree and having pepper put into her eyes, a
lock of hair was cut from her head and buried in the ground,
<q>that the last link between her and her former powers of mischief
might be broken.</q><note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 281 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In like manner among the Aztecs
of Mexico, when wizards and witches <q>had done their evil
deeds, and the time came to put an end to their detestable
life, some one laid hold of them and cropped the hair on the
crown of their heads, which took from them all their power
of sorcery and enchantment, and then it was that by death
they put an end to their odious existence.</q><note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des choses
de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>, traduite par
D. Journdanet et R. Siméon (Paris,
1880), p. 274.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The External Soul in Plants.'/>
<head>§ 2. The External Soul in Plants.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Life of a
person
supposed
to be bound
up with
that of a
tree or
plant. Birth-trees
in Africa.</note>
Further it has been shewn that in folk-tales the life of
a person is sometimes so bound up with the life of a plant
that the withering of the plant will immediately follow or be
followed by the death of the person.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
<ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>.</note> Similarly among the
natives of the Pennefather River in Queensland, when a
visiter has made himself very agreeable and taken his
departure, an effigy of him about three or four feet long is
cut on some soft tree, such as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Canarium australasicum</foreign>,
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
so as to face in the direction taken by the popular stranger.
Afterwards from observing the state of the tree the natives
infer the corresponding state of their absent friend, whose
illness or death are apparently supposed to be portended by
the fall of the leaves or of the tree.<note place='foot'>Walter E. Roth, <hi rend='italic'>North Queensland
Ethnography, Bulletin, No. 5,
Superstition, Magic, and Medicine</hi>
(Brisbane, 1903), p. 27.</note> In Uganda, when a
new royal enclosure with its numerous houses was built for
a new king, barkcloth trees used to be planted at the main
entrance by priests of each principal deity and offerings were
laid under each tree for its particular god. Thenceforth
<q>the trees were carefully guarded and tended, because it was
believed that as they grew and flourished, so the king's life
and power would increase.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 202.</note> Among the M'Bengas in
Western Africa, about the Gaboon, when two children are
born on the same day, the people plant two trees of the
same kind and dance round them. The life of each of the
children is believed to be bound up with the life of one of
the trees; and if the tree dies or is thrown down, they are
sure that the child will soon die.<note place='foot'>G. Duloup, <q>Huit jours chez les
M'Bengas,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>, ii.
(1883), p. 223; compare P. Barret,
<hi rend='italic'>L'Afrique Occidentale</hi> (Paris, 1888),
ii. 173.</note> In Sierra Leone also it is
customary at the birth of a child to plant a shoot of a <foreign rend='italic'>malep</foreign>-tree,
and they think that the tree will grow with the child
and be its god. If a tree which has been thus planted withers
away, the people consult a sorcerer on the subject.<note place='foot'>Fr. Kunstmann, <q>Valentin Ferdinand's
Beschreibung der Serra Leoa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der histor. Classe der
könig. Bayer. Akad. der Wissenschaften</hi>,
ix. (1866) pp. 131 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among
the Wajagga of German East Africa, when a child is born,
it is usual to plant a cultivated plant of some sort behind
the house. The plant is thenceforth carefully tended, for
they believe that were it to wither away the child would die.
When the navel-string drops from the infant, it is buried
under the plant. The species of birth-plant varies with the
clan; members of one clan, for example, plant a particular
sort of banana, members of another clan plant a sugar-cane,
and so on.<note place='foot'>Bruno Gutmann, <q>Feldbausitten
und Wachstumsbräuche der Wadschagga,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>,
xlv. (1913), p. 496.</note> Among the Swahili of East Africa, when a
child is born, the afterbirth and navel-string are buried in
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
the courtyard and a mark is made on the spot. Seven
days afterwards, the hair of the child is shaved and
deposited, along with the clippings of its nails, in the
same place. Then over all these relics of the infant's
person a coco-nut is planted. As the tree grows up from
the nut, the child likes to point it out to his playfellows
and tell them, <q>This coco-nut palm is my navel.</q> In
planting the coco-nut the parents say, <q>May God cause our
child to grow up, that he or she may one day enjoy the
coco-nut milk of the tree which we plant here.</q><note place='foot'>C. Velten, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten und Gebräuche
der Suaheli</hi> (Göttingen, 1903), pp.
8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In Java it is customary to plant
a tree, for example, a coco-nut palm,
at the birth of a child, and when he
grows up he reckons his age by the
age of the tree. See <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la
Propagation de la Foi</hi>, iii. (Lyons and
Paris, 1830) pp. 400 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Though
it is not expressly affirmed, we may perhaps assume that
such a birth-tree is supposed to stand in a sympathetic
relation with the life of the person. In the Cameroons, also,
the life of a person is believed to be sympathetically bound
up with that of a tree.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi> (Jena, 1874-1875),
i. 165.</note> The chief of Old Town in Calabar
kept his soul in a sacred grove near a spring of water.
When some Europeans, in frolic or ignorance, cut down part
of the grove, the spirit was most indignant and threatened
the perpetrators of the deed, according to the king, with all
manner of evil.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Religion and
Myth</hi> (London, 1893), p. 178.</note> Among the Fans of the French Congo,
when a chief's son is born, the remains of the navel-string
are buried under a sacred fig-tree, and <q>thenceforth great
importance is attached to the growth of the tree; it is strictly
forbidden to touch it. Any attempt on the tree would be
considered as an attack on the human being himself.</q><note place='foot'>H. Trilles, <hi rend='italic'>Le Totémisme chez les
Fân</hi> (Münster i. W., 1912), p. 570.</note>
Among the Boloki of the Upper Congo a family has a plant
with red leaves (called <foreign rend='italic'>nkungu</foreign>) for its totem. When a
woman of the family is with child for the first time, one of
the totemic plants is planted near the hearth outside the
house and is never destroyed, otherwise it is believed that
the child would be born thin and weak and would remain
puny and sickly. <q>The healthy life of the children and
family is bound up with the healthiness and life of the totem
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
tree as respected and preserved by the family.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. John H. Weeks, <hi rend='italic'>Among
Congo Cannibals</hi> (London, 1913), p.
295.</note> Among
the Baganda of Central Africa a child's afterbirth was called
the second child and was believed to be animated by a spirit,
which at once became a ghost. The afterbirth was usually
buried at the root of a banana tree, and afterwards the tree
was carefully guarded by old women, who prevented any
one from going near it; they tied ropes of fibre from tree
to tree to isolate it, and all the child's excretions were
thrown into this enclosure. When the fruit ripened, it was
cut by the old woman in charge. The reason for guarding
the tree thus carefully was a belief that if any stranger were
to eat of the fruit of the tree or to drink beer brewed from
it, he would carry off with him the ghost of the child's afterbirth,
which had been buried at the root of the banana-tree,
and the living child would then die in order to follow its
twin ghost. Whereas a grandparent of the child, by eating
the fruit or drinking the beer, averted this catastrophe and
ensured the health of the child.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 52, 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare
<hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; and for other
examples of burying the afterbirth or
navel-string at the foot of a tree or
planting a young tree over these remains,
see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In
Kiziba, a district to the west of Lake
Victoria Nyanza, the afterbirth is
similarly regarded as a sort of human
being. Hence when twins are born
the people speak of four children
instead of two, reckoning the two
afterbirths as two children. See H.
Rehse, <hi rend='italic'>Kiziba, Land und Leute</hi> (Stuttgart,
1910), p. 117. The conception
of the afterbirth and navel-string as
spiritual doubles of the child with
whom they are born is held very firmly
by the Kooboos, a primitive tribe of
Sumatra. We are told that among
these people <q>a great vital power is
ascribed to the navel-string and afterbirth;
because they are looked upon
as brother or sister of the infant, and
though their bodies have not come to
perfection, yet their soul and spirit are
just as normal as those of the child
and indeed have even reached a much
higher stage of development. The
navel-string (<foreign rend='italic'>oeri</foreign>) and afterbirth (<foreign rend='italic'>tĕm-boeni</foreign>)
visit the man who was born with
them thrice a day and thrice by night
till his death, or they hover near him
(<q><foreign lang='nl' rend='italic'>zweven voorbij hem heen</foreign></q>). They
are the good spirits, a sort of guardian
angels of the man who came into the
world with them and who lives on
earth; they are said to guard him from
all evil. Hence it is that the Kooboo
always thinks of his navel-string and
afterbirth (<foreign rend='italic'>oeri-tĕmboeni</foreign>) before he goes
to sleep or to work, or undertakes a
journey, and so on. Merely to think
of them is enough; there is no need to
invoke them, or to ask them anything,
or to entreat them. By not thinking
of them a man deprives himself of their
good care.</q> Immediately after the
birth the navel-string and afterbirth
are buried in the ground close by the
spot where the birth took place; and
a ceremony is performed over it, for
were the ceremony omitted, the navel-string
and afterbirth, <q>instead of being
a good spirit for the newly born child,
might become an evil spirit for him
and visit him with all sorts of calamities
out of spite for this neglect.</q> The
nature of the ceremony performed over
the spot is not described by our
authority. The navel-string and afterbirth
are often regarded by the Kooboos
as one; their names are always
mentioned together. See G. J. van
Dongen, <q>De Koeboe in de Onderafdeeling
Koeboe-streken der Residentie
Palembang,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal-
Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
lxiii. (1910) pp. 229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Wakondyo,
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
at the north-western corner of Lake Albert Nyanza, it is
customary to bury the afterbirth at the foot of a young
banana-tree, and the fruit of this particular tree may be
eaten by no one but the woman who assisted at the birth.<note place='foot'>Franz Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin
Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</hi> (Berlin,
1894), p. 653.</note>
The reason for the custom is not mentioned, but probably,
as among the Baganda, the life of the child is supposed to
be bound up with the life of the tree, since the afterbirth,
regarded as a spiritual double of the infant, has been buried
at the root of the tree.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Birth-trees
among the
Papuans,
Maoris,
Fijians,
Dyaks,
and others.</note>
Some of the Papuans unite the life of a new-born child
sympathetically with that of a tree by driving a pebble into
the bark of the tree. This is supposed to give them complete
mastery over the child's life; if the tree is cut down,
the child will die.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Ein Besuch in San
Salvador</hi> (Bremen, 1859), pp. 103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Der Mensch in der Geschichte</hi>
(Leipsic, 1860), iii. 193.</note> After a birth the Maoris used to bury
the navel-string in a sacred place and plant a young sapling
over it. As the tree grew, it was a <foreign rend='italic'>tohu oranga</foreign> or sign of
life for the child; if it flourished, the child would prosper;
if it withered and died, the parents augured the worst for
their child.<note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui, or
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1870), p. 184; Dumont
D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour du monde et
à la recherche de La Pérouse sur la
corvette Astrolabe</hi>, ii. 444.</note> In the Chatham Islands, when the child of a
leading man received its name, it was customary to plant
a tree, <q>the growth of which was to be as the growth of the
child,</q> and during the planting priests chanted a spell.<note place='foot'>W. T. L. Travers, <q>Notes of the
traditions and manners and customs of
the Mori-oris,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions and Proceedings
of the New Zealand Institute</hi>,
ix. (1876) p. 22.</note> In
some parts of Fiji the navel-string of a male child is planted
together with a coco-nut or the slip of a breadfruit-tree, and
the child's life is supposed to be intimately connected with
that of the tree.<note place='foot'>The late Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a
letter to me dated May 29th, 1901.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 184.</note> With certain Malayo-Siamese families of
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
the Patani States it is customary to bury the afterbirth
under a banana-tree, and the condition of the tree is afterwards
regarded as ominous of the child's fate for good or
evil.<note place='foot'>N. Annandale, <q>Customs of the
Malayo-Siamese,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Fasciculi Malayenses</hi>,
Anthropology, part ii. (a) (May,
1904), p. 5.</note> In Southern Celebes, when a child is born, a coco-nut
is planted and watered with the water in which the afterbirth
and navel-string have been washed. As it grows up,
the tree is called the <q>contemporary</q> of the child.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi> (The
Hague, 1875), p. 59.</note> So in
Bali a coco-palm is planted at the birth of a child. It is
believed to grow up equally with the child, and is called its
<q>life-plant.</q><note place='foot'>R. van Eck, <q>Schetsen van het
eiland Bali,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch
Indië</hi>, N.S., ix. (1880) pp.
417 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On certain occasions the Dyaks of Borneo
plant a palm-tree, which is believed to be a complete index
of their fate. If it flourishes, they reckon on good fortune;
but if it withers or dies, they expect misfortune.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <q>De Simsonsage,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>De Gids</hi>, 1888, No. 5, p. 26 (of the
separate reprint); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Verspreide Geschriften</hi>
(The Hague, 1912), iii. 562.</note> Amongst
the Dyaks of Landak and Tajan, districts of Dutch
Borneo, it is customary to plant a fruit-tree for a child,
and henceforth in the popular belief the fate of the child
is bound up with that of the tree. If the tree shoots up
rapidly, it will go well with the child; but if the tree is
dwarfed or shrivelled, nothing but misfortune can be expected
for its human counterpart.<note place='foot'>M. C. Schadee, <q>Het familieleven
en familierecht der Dajaks van
Landak en Tajan,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, lxiii. (1910) p.
416.</note> According to another
account, at the naming of children and certain other festivals
the Dyaks are wont to set a <foreign rend='italic'>sawang</foreign>-plant, roots and all,
before a priestess; and when the festival is over, the plant
is replaced in the ground. Such a plant becomes thenceforth
a sort of prophetic index for the person in whose
honour the festival was held. If the plant thrives, the
man will be fortunate; if it fades or perishes, some evil
will befall him.<note place='foot'>F. Grabowsky, <q>Die Theogenie
der Dajaken auf Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, v.
(1892) p. 133.</note> The Dyaks also believe that at the birth
of every person on earth a flower grows up in the spirit
world and leads a life parallel to his. If the flower flourishes,
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
the man enjoys good health, but if it droops, so does he.
Hence when he has dreamed bad dreams or has felt unwell
for several days, he infers that his flower in the other world
is neglected or sickly, and accordingly he employs a medicine-man
to tend the precious plant, weed the soil, and sweep it
up, in order that the earthly and unearthly life may prosper
once more.<note place='foot'>J. Perham, <q>Manangism in
Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, No. 19
(Singapore, 1887), p. 97; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in H.
Ling Roth, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives of Sarawak
and British North Borneo</hi> (London,
1896), i. 278.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Birth-trees
in Europe.
Marriage
oaks.
Trees with
which the
fate of
families or
individuals
is thought
to be
bound up. The Edgewell
oak.
The old
tree at
Howth
Castle.
The oak
of the
Guelphs.</note>
It is said that there are still families in Russia, Germany,
England, France, and Italy who are accustomed to plant a
tree at the birth of a child. The tree, it is hoped, will grow
with the child, and it is tended with special care.<note place='foot'>Angelo de Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie
des Plantes</hi> (Paris, 1878-1882), i. pp.
xxviii. <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
custom is still pretty general in the canton of Aargau in
Switzerland; an apple-tree is planted for a boy and a pear-tree
for a girl, and the people think that the child will
flourish or dwindle with the tree.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
50; H. Ploss, <hi rend='italic'>Das Kind</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Leipsic,
1884), i. 79.</note> In Mecklenburg the
afterbirth is thrown out at the foot of a young tree, and the
child is then believed to grow with the tree.<note place='foot'>K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</hi> (Vienna,
1879-1880), ii. p. 43, § 63.</note> In Bosnia,
when the children of a family have died one after the other,
the hair of the next child is cut with some ceremony by a
stranger, and the mother carries the shorn tresses into the
garden, where she ties them to a fine young tree, in order
that her child may grow and flourish like the tree.<note place='foot'>F. S. Krauss, <q>Haarschurgodschaft
bei den Südslaven,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, vii.
(1894) p. 193.</note> At
Muskau, in Lausitz, it used to be customary for bride and
bridegroom on the morning of their wedding-day to plant
a pair of young oaks side by side, and as each of the trees
flourished or withered, so the good luck of the person who
planted it was believed to wax or wane.<note place='foot'>Karl Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch der Lausitz</hi>
(Leipsic, 1862-1863), ii. 129, No.
207.</note> On a promontory
in Lake Keitele, in Finland, there used to stand an old fir-tree,
which according to tradition had been planted by the
first colonists to serve as a symbol or token of their fortune.
First-fruits of the harvest used to be offered to the tree
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
before any one would taste of the new crop; and whenever
a branch fell, it was deemed a sign that some one would die.
More and more the crown of the tree withered away, and in
the same proportion the family whose ancestors had planted
the fir dwindled away, till only one old woman was left.
At last the tree fell, and soon afterwards the old woman
departed this life.<note place='foot'><q>Heilige Haine und Bäume der
Finnen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lix. (1891) p. 350.
Compare K. Rhamm, <q>Der heidenische
Gottesdienst des finnischen
Stammes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxvii. (1891) p.
344.</note> When Lord Byron first visited his
ancestral estate of Newstead <q>he planted, it seems, a young
oak in some part of the grounds, and had an idea that as <emph>it</emph>
flourished so should <emph>he</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>Thomas Moore, <hi rend='italic'>Life of Lord
Byron</hi>, i. 101 (i. 148, in the collected
edition of Byron's works, London,
1832-1833).</note> On a day when the cloud that
settled on the later years of Sir Walter Scott lifted a little,
and he heard that <hi rend='italic'>Woodstock</hi> had sold for over eight thousand
pounds, he wrote in his journal: <q>I have a curious fancy;
I will go set two or three acorns, and judge by their success
in growing whether I shall succeed in clearing my way or
not.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. Lockhart, <hi rend='italic'>Life of Sir Walter
Scott</hi> (First Edition), vi. 283 (viii. 317,
Second Edition, Edinburgh, 1839).</note> Near the Castle of Dalhousie, not far from Edinburgh,
there grows an oak-tree, called the Edgewell Tree,
which is popularly believed to be linked to the fate of the
family by a mysterious tie; for they say that when one of the
family dies, or is about to die, a branch falls from the Edgewell
Tree. Thus, on seeing a great bough drop from the
tree on a quiet, still day in July 1874, an old forester
exclaimed, <q>The laird's deid noo!</q> and soon after news
came that Fox Maule, eleventh Earl of Dalhousie, was
dead.<note place='foot'>Sir Walter Scott's <hi rend='italic'>Journal</hi> (First
Edition, Edinburgh, 1890), ii. 282,
with the editor's note.</note> At Howth Castle in Ireland there is an old tree
with which the fortunes of the St. Lawrence family are
supposed to be connected. The branches of the tree are
propped on strong supports, for tradition runs that when the
tree falls the direct line of the Earls of Howth will become
extinct.<note place='foot'>Letter of Miss A. H. Singleton to
me, dated Rathmagle House, Abbey
Leix, Ireland, 24th February, 1904.</note> On the old road from Hanover to Osnabrück, at
the village of Oster-Kappeln, there used to stand an ancient
oak, which put out its last green shoot in the year 1849. The
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
tree was conjecturally supposed to be contemporary with
the Guelphs; and in the year 1866, so fatal for the house
of Hanover, on a calm summer afternoon, without any
visible cause, the veteran suddenly fell with a crash and lay
stretched across the highroad. The peasants regarded its
fall as an ill omen for the reigning family, and when King
George V. heard of it he gave orders that the giant trunk
should be set up again, and it was done with much trouble
and at great expense, the stump being supported in position
by iron chains clamped to the neighbouring trees. But the
king's efforts to prop the falling fortunes of his house were
vain; a few months after the fall of the oak Hanover
formed part of the Prussian monarchy.<note place='foot'>P. Wagler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</hi>, ii. (Berlin, 1891) pp.
85 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Life-tree
of the
Manchu
dynasty.</note>
In the midst of the <q>Forbidden City</q> at Peking there
is a tiny private garden, where the emperors of the now
fallen Manchu dynasty used to take the air and refresh
themselves after the cares of state. In accordance with
Chinese taste the garden is a labyrinth of artificial rockeries,
waterfalls, grottoes, and kiosks, in which everything is as
unlike nature as art can make it. The trees in particular
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Arbor vitae</foreign>), the principal ornament of the garden, exhibit
the last refinement of the gardener's skill, being clipped and
distorted into a variety of grotesque shapes. Only one of
the trees remained intact and had been spared these deformations
for centuries. Far from being stunted by the axe
or the shears, the tree was carefully tended and encouraged
to shoot up to its full height. <q>It was the <q>Life-tree of the
Dynasty,</q> and according to legend the prosperity or fall of
the present dynasty went hand in hand with the welfare or
death of the tree. Certainly, if we accept the tradition, the
days of the present reigning house must be numbered, for
all the care and attention lavished on the tree have been
for some years in vain. A glance at our illustration shews
the tree as it still surpasses all its fellows in height and size;
but it owes its pre-eminence only to the many artificial
props which hold it up. In reality the <q>Life-tree of the
Dynasty</q> is dying, and might fall over night, if one of its
artificial props were suddenly to give way. For the
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
superstitious Chinese&mdash;and superstitious they certainly are&mdash;it
is a very, very evil omen.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Woche</hi>, Berlin, 31 August,
1901, p. 3, with an illustration shewing
the garden and the tree.</note> Some twelve years have
passed since this passage was written, and in the interval
the omen has been fulfilled&mdash;the Manchu dynasty has
fallen. We may conjecture that the old tree in the quaint
old garden has fallen too. So vain are all human efforts to
arrest the decay of royal houses by underpropping trees on
which nature herself has passed a sentence of death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
myrtle-trees
of the
patricians
and
plebeians
at Rome.
The oak
of the
Vespasian
family.</note>
At Rome in the ancient sanctuary of Quirinus there
grew two old myrtle-trees, one named the Patrician and
the other the Plebeian. For many years, so long as the
patricians were in the ascendant, their myrtle-tree flourished
and spread its branches abroad, while the myrtle of the
plebeians was shrivelled and shrunken; but from the time
of the Marsian war, when the power of the nobles declined,
their myrtle in like manner drooped and withered,
whereas that of the popular party held up its head and
grew strong.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Natur. Hist.</hi> xv. 120 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thrice when Vespasia was with child, an
old oak in the garden of the Flavian family near Rome
suddenly put forth branches. The first branch was puny
and soon withered away, and the girl who was born accordingly
died within the year; the second branch was
long and sturdy; and the third was like a tree. So on the
third occasion the happy father reported to his mother that
a future emperor was born to her as a grandchild. The old
lady only laughed to think that at her age she should keep
her wits about her, while her son had lost his; yet the omen
of the oak came true, for the grandson was afterwards the
emperor Vespasian.<note place='foot'>Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>Divus Vespasianus</hi>, 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Life of
persons
supposed
to be
bound up
with that
of the cleft
trees
through
which in
their youth
they were
passed as
a cure for
rupture.
In England
ruptured
children
are passed
through
cleft ash-trees.</note>
In England children are sometimes passed through a
cleft ash-tree as a cure for rupture or rickets, and thenceforward
a sympathetic connexion is supposed to exist
between them and the tree. An ash-tree which had been
used for this purpose grew at the edge of Shirley Heath,
on the road from Hockly House to Birmingham. <q>Thomas
Chillingworth, son of the owner of an adjoining farm,
now about thirty-four, was, when an infant of a year old,
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
passed through a similar tree, now perfectly sound, which he
preserves with so much care that he will not suffer a single
branch to be touched, for it is believed the life of the
patient depends on the life of the tree, and the moment that
it is cut down, be the patient ever so distant, the rupture
returns, and a mortification ensues, and terminates in death,
as was the case in a man driving a waggon on the very
road in question.</q> <q>It is not uncommon, however,</q> adds the
writer, <q>for persons to survive for a time the felling of the
tree.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Gentleman's Magazine</hi>, 1804,
p. 909; John Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities
of Great Britain</hi> (London, 1882-1883),
iii. 289.</note> The ordinary mode of effecting the cure is to split
a young ash-sapling longitudinally for a few feet and pass
the child, naked, either three times or three times three
through the fissure at sunrise. In the West of England it
is said that the passage should be <q>against the sun.</q> As
soon as the ceremony has been performed, the tree is bound
tightly up and the fissure plastered over with mud or clay.
The belief is that just as the cleft in the tree closes up, so
the rupture in the child's body will be healed; but that if
the rift in the tree remains open, the rupture in the child
will remain too, and if the tree were to die, the death of the
child would surely follow.<note place='foot'>Gilbert White, <hi rend='italic'>The Natural History
of Selborne</hi>, Part II. Letter 28
(Edinburgh, 1829), pp. 239 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Francis Grose, <hi rend='italic'>A Provincial Glossary</hi>
(London, 1811), p. 290; J. Brand,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 287-292; R. Hunt, <hi rend='italic'>Popular
Romances of the West of England</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(London, 1881), pp. 415, 421; W. G.
Black, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi> (London, 1883),
pp. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Wollaston Groome,
<q>Suffolk Leechcraft,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vi.
(1895) pp. 123 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. S. Hartland,
in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vii. (1896) pp. 303-306;
<hi rend='italic'>County Folk-lore, Suffolk</hi>, edited by
Lady E. C. Gurdon (London, 1893)
pp. 26-28; Beatrix A. Wherry, <q>Miscellaneous
Notes from Monmouthshire,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xvi. (1905) p. 65;
Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and Folk-stories
of Wales</hi> (London, 1909), p.
320. Sometimes the tree was an oak
instead of an ash (M. Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>).
To ensure the success of the cure
various additional precautions are sometimes
recommended, as that the ash
should be a maiden, that is a tree that
has never been topped or cut; that the
split should be made east and west;
that the child should be passed into
the tree by a maiden and taken out on
the other side by a boy; that the child
should always be passed through head
foremost (but according to others feet
foremost), and so forth. In Surrey we
hear of a holly-tree being used instead
of an ash (<hi rend='italic'>Notes and Queries</hi>, Sixth
Series, xi. Jan.-Jun. 1885, p. 46).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
practice
in Sussex.</note>
Down to the second half of the nineteenth century
the remedy was still in common use at Fittleworth and
many other places in Sussex. The account of the
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
Sussex practice and belief is notable because it brings
out very clearly the sympathetic relation supposed to
exist between the ruptured child and the tree through
which it has been passed. We are told that the patient
<q>must be passed nine times every morning on nine successive
days at sunrise through a cleft in a sapling ash-tree, which
has been so far given up by the owner of it to the parents
of the child, as that there is an understanding it shall not
be cut down during the life of the infant who is to be
passed through it. The sapling must be sound at heart,
and the cleft must be made with an axe. The child on
being carried to the tree must be attended by nine persons,
each of whom must pass it through the cleft from west to
east. On the ninth morning the solemn ceremony is concluded
by binding the tree lightly with a cord, and it is
supposed that as the cleft closes the health of the child will
improve. In the neighbourhood of Petworth some cleft
ash-trees may be seen, through which children have very
recently been passed. I may add, that only a few weeks
since, a person who had lately purchased an ash-tree standing
in this parish, intending to cut it down, was told by the
father of a child, who had some time before been passed
through it, that the infirmity would be sure to return upon
his son if it were felled. Whereupon the good man said, he
knew that such would be the case; and therefore he would
not fell it for the world.</q><note place='foot'><q>Some West Sussex superstitions
lingering in 1868, collected by
Charlotte Latham, at Fittleworth,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Record</hi>, i. (1878) pp. 40 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sick
children
passed
through
cleft trees,
especially
oaks, as a
cure in
Germany,
France,
Denmark,
Sweden,
and Greece.</note>
A similar cure for various diseases, but especially
for rupture and rickets, has been commonly practised in
other parts of Europe, as Germany, France, Denmark, and
Sweden; but in these countries the tree employed for the
purpose is usually not an ash but an oak; sometimes a
willow-tree is allowed or even prescribed instead. With
these exceptions the practice and the belief are nearly the
same on the Continent as in England: a young oak is split
longitudinally and the two sides held forcibly apart while
the sick child is passed through the cleft; then the
opening in the tree is closed, and bound up, and it is
believed that as the cleft in the tree heals by the parts
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
growing together again, so the rupture in the child
will be simultaneously cured. It is often laid down that
the ceremony must be performed in the strictest silence;
sometimes the time prescribed is before sunrise, and sometimes
the child must be passed thrice through the cleft.<note place='foot'>For the custom in Germany and
Austria, see J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 975 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Wuttke,
<hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin,
1869), p. 317, § 503; A. Kuhn und
W. Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Nord-deutsche Sagen,
Märchen und Gebräuche</hi> (Leipsic,
1848), pp. 443 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. F. L. Woeste,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksüberlieferungen in der Grafschaft
Mark</hi> (Iserlohn, 1848), p. 54; E. Meier,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche
aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart, 1852), p.
390, § 56; F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur
deutschen Mythologie</hi> (Munich, 1848-1855),
ii. 301; <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und
Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</hi>,
ii. (Munich, 1863) p. 255; J. A. E.
Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch, Aberglauben,
Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen
im Voigtlande</hi> (Leipsic, 1867), pp. 415
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>
(Oldenburg, 1867), i. 72 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 88;
K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche
aus Mecklenburg</hi> (Vienna, 1879-1880),
ii. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 1447; J. Haltrich,
<hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde der Siebenbürger
Sachsen</hi> (Vienna, 1885), p. 264; P.
Wagler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Eiche in alter und neuer
Zeit</hi>, i. (Wurzen, 1891) pp. 21-23. As
to the custom in France, see Marcellus,
<hi rend='italic'>De medicamentis</hi>, xxxiii. 26 (where the
tree is a cherry); J. B. Thiers, <hi rend='italic'>Traité
des Superstitions</hi> (Paris, 1679), pp. 333
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes et
Traditions des Provinces de France</hi>
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 231; L. J. B.
Bérenger-Féraud, in <hi rend='italic'>Bullétins de la
Société d'Anthropologie de Paris</hi>, iv.
série, i. (1890) pp. 895-902; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions
et Survivances</hi> (Paris, 1896), i.
523 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> As to the custom in Denmark
and Sweden, see J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 976; H. F. Feilberg,
<q>Zwieselbäume nebst verwandtem
Aberglauben in Skandinavien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
des Vereins für Volkskunde</hi>,
vii. (1897) pp. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In Mecklenburg
it is sometimes required that the
tree should have been split by lightning
(K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>). The whole subject
of passing sick people through narrow
apertures as a mode of cure has been
well handled in an elegant little monograph
(<hi rend='italic'>Un Vieux Rite médical</hi>, Paris,
1892) by Monsieur H. Gaidoz, who
rightly rejects the theory that all
such passages are symbols of a new
birth. But I cannot agree with
him in thinking that the essence
of the rite consists in the transference
of the disease from the person to
the tree; rather, it seems to me, the
primary idea is that of interposing an
impassable barrier between a fugitive
and his pursuing foe, though no doubt
the enemy thus left behind is apparently
supposed to adhere to the further side
of the obstacle (whether tree, stone, or
what not) through which he cannot
pass. However, the sympathetic relation
supposed to exist between the
sufferer and the tree through which he
has been passed certainly favours the
view that he has left some portion of
himself attached to the tree. But in
this as in many similar cases, the ideas
in the minds of the persons who
practise the custom are probably vague,
confused, and inconsistent; and we need
not attempt to define them precisely.
Compare also R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Parallelen und Vergleiche</hi>
(Stuttgart, 1878), pp. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. S.
Hartland, <hi rend='italic'>The Legend of Perseus</hi>
(London, 1894-1896), ii. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
L. J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions
et Survivances</hi> (Paris, 1896), i. 523-540.</note> In
Oldenburg and Mecklenburg they say that the cure should
be performed on St. John's Eve (Midsummer Eve) by three
men named John, who assist each other in holding the split
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
oak-sapling open and passing the child through it.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; K. Bartsch,
<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Some
people, however, prefer Good Friday or Christmas Eve as the
season for the performance of the ceremony.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes-
und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</hi>,
ii. 255; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In Denmark
copper coins are laid as an offering at the foot of the tree
through which sick persons have been passed; and threads,
ribbons, or bandages which have been worn by the sufferers
are tied to a branch of the tree.<note place='foot'>H. F. Feilberg, <q>Zwieselbäume
nebst verwandtem Aberglauben in
Skandinavien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift des Vereins
für Volkskunde</hi>, vii. (1897) p. 44.</note> In the Greek island of
Ceos, when a child is sickly, the parents carry it out into the
country <q>and the father selects a young oak; this they split
up from the root, then the father is assisted by another man
in holding the tree open whilst the mother passes the child
three times through, and then they bind up the tree well,
cover it all over with manure, and carefully water it for
forty days. In the same fashion they bind up the child for
a like period, and after the lapse of this time they expect
that it will be quite well.</q><note place='foot'>J. Theodore Bent, <hi rend='italic'>The Cyclades</hi>
(London, 1885), pp. 457 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sympathetic
relation
thought
to exist
between
the child
and the tree
through
which it
has been
passed.
The disease
is apparently
thought
to be left
behind on
the farther
side of the
cleft tree.</note>
In Mecklenburg, as in England, the sympathetic relation
thus established between the tree and the child is so close
that if the tree is cut down the child will die.<note place='foot'>H. Ploss, <hi rend='italic'>Das Kind</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Leipsic,
1884), ii. 221.</note> In the
island of Rügen people believe that when a person who has
been thus cured of rupture dies, his soul passes into the
same oak-tree through which his body was passed in his
youth.<note place='foot'>R. Baier, <q>Beiträge von der Insel
Rügen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie
und Sittenkunde</hi>, ii. (1855)
p. 141.</note> Thus it seems that in ridding himself of the
disease the sufferer is supposed to transfer a certain vital
part of his person to the tree so that it is impossible to injure
the tree without at the same time injuring the man; and in
Rügen this partial union is thought to be completed by the
transmigration of the man's soul at death into the tree.
Apparently the disease is conceived as something physical,
which clings to the patient but can be stripped off him and
left behind on the farther side of the narrow aperture
through which he has forced his way; when the aperture is
closed by the natural growth of the tree, the door is as it
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
were shut against the disease, which is then unable to
pursue and overtake the sufferer. Hence the idea at the
root of the custom is not so much that the patient has
transferred his ailment to the tree, as that the tree forms an
impervious barrier between him and the malady which had
hitherto afflicted him. This interpretation is confirmed by
the following parallels.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Creeping
through
cleft trees
to get rid
of spirits
in Armenia
and Nias. Among the
Bella Coola
Indians
mourners
creep
through
cleft trees
to get rid of
the ghost.</note>
In those parts of Armenia which are covered with
forests, many great and ancient trees are revered as sacred
and receive marks of homage. The people burn lights
before them, fumigate them with incense, sacrifice cocks and
wethers to them, and creep through holes in their trunks or
push lean and sickly children through them <q>in order to put
a stop to the influence of evil spirits.</q><note place='foot'>Manuk Abeghian, <hi rend='italic'>Der armenische Volksglaube</hi> (Leipsic, 1899), p. 58.</note> Apparently, they
think that evil spirits cannot creep through the cleft in the
holy tree, and therefore that the sick who have effected the
passage are safe from their demoniacal pursuers. The same
conception of a fissure in a tree as an obstacle placed in the
path of pursuing spirits meets us in a number of savage
customs. Thus in the island of Nias, when a man is in
training for the priesthood, he has to be introduced to the
various spirits between whom and mankind it will be his
office to mediate. A priest takes him to an open window,
and while the drums are beating points out to him the great
spirit in the sun who calls away men to himself through
death; for it is needful that the future priest should know
him from whose grasp he will often be expected to wrest the
sick and dying. In the evening twilight he is led to the
graves and shewn the envious spirits of the dead, who also
are ever drawing away the living to their own shadowy
world. Next day he is conducted to a river and shewn the
spirit of the waters; and finally they take him up to a
mountain and exhibit to him the spirits of the mountains,
who have diverse shapes, some appearing like swine, others
like buffaloes, others like goats, and others again like men
with long hair on their bodies. When he has seen all this,
his education is complete, but on his return from the
mountain the new priest may not at once enter his own
house. For the people think that, were he to do so, the
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
dangerous spirits by whom he is still environed would stay
in the house and visit both the family and the pigs with
sickness. Accordingly he betakes himself to other villages
and passes several nights there, hoping that the spirits will
leave him and settle on the friends who receive him into
their houses; but naturally he does not reveal the intention
of his visits to his hosts. Lastly, before he enters his own
dwelling, he looks out for some young tree by the way,
splits it down the middle, and then creeps through the
fissure, in the belief that any spirit which may still be
clinging to him will thus be left sticking to the tree.<note place='foot'>Fr. Kramer, <q>Der Götzendienst
der Niasser,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxiii.
(1890) pp. 478-480; H. Sundermann,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Insel Nias und die Mission daselbst</hi>
(Barmen, 1905), pp. 81-83. According
to the latter writer the intention of
passing through the cleft stick is <q>to
strip off from himself (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>von zich
abzustreifen</foreign>) the last spirit that may
have followed him.</q> The notion that
the sun causes death by drawing away
the souls of the living is Indian. See
<hi rend='italic'>The Satapatha Brâhmana</hi>, ii. 3. 3.
7-8, translated by Julius Eggeling,
Part I. (Oxford, 1882) p. 343 (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred
Books of the East</hi>, vol. xii.): <q>Now
yonder burning (sun) doubtless is no
other than Death; and because he is
Death, therefore the creatures that are
on this side of him die. But those
that are on the other side of him are
the gods, and they are therefore immortal....
And the breath of whomsoever
he (the sun) wishes he takes and
rises, and that one dies.</q></note> Again,
among the Bilqula or Bella Coola Indians of British Columbia
<q>the bed of a mourner must be protected against the ghost
of the deceased. His male relatives stick a thorn-bush into
the ground at each corner of their beds. After four days
these are thrown into the water. Mourners must rise early
and go into the woods, where they stick four thorn-bushes
into the ground, at the corners of a square, in which they
cleanse themselves by rubbing their bodies with cedar
branches. They also swim in ponds. After swimming
they cleave four small trees and creep through the clefts,
following the course of the sun. This they do on four subsequent
mornings, cleaving new trees every day. Mourners
cut their hair short. The hair that has been cut off is
burnt. If they should not observe these regulations, it is
believed that they would dream of the deceased.</q><note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Seventh Report on
the North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>,
p. 13 (separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report
of the British Association</hi>, Cardiff meeting,
1891). The Shuswap Indians
of the same region also fence their
beds against ghosts with a hedge of
thorn bushes. See <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the
Perils of the Soul</hi>, p. 142.</note> To the
savage, who fails to distinguish the visions of sleep from the
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
appearances of waking life, the apparition of a dead man in
a dream is equivalent to the actual presence of the ghost;
and accordingly he seeks to keep off the spiritual intruder,
just as he might a creature of flesh and blood, by fencing
his bed with thorn-bushes. Similarly the practice of creeping
through four cleft trees is clearly an attempt to shake
off the clinging ghost and leave it adhering to the trees, just
as in Nias the future priest hopes to rid himself in like
manner of the dangerous spirits who have dogged his steps
from the mountains and the graves.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Madangs
of Borneo
creep
through a
cleft stick
after a
funeral in
order to
rid themselves
of
the ghost.</note>
This interpretation of the custom is strongly confirmed
by a funeral ceremony which Dr. Charles Hose witnessed
at the chief village of the Madangs, a tribe of Kayans
who occupy a hitherto unexplored district in the heart
of Borneo. <q>Just across the river from where we were
sitting,</q> says Dr. Hose, <q>was the graveyard, and there I
witnessed a funeral procession as the day was drawing to a
close. The coffin, which was a wooden box made from a
tree-trunk, was decorated with red and black patterns in
circles, with two small wooden figures of men placed at either
end; it was lashed with rattans to a long pole, and by this
means was lifted to the shoulders of the bearers, who
numbered thirteen in all, and who then carried it to the
burying-ground. After the mourners had all passed over
to the graveyard, a man quickly cut a couple of small sticks,
each five feet long and about an inch in diameter. One of
these he split almost the whole way down, and forced the
unsplit end into the ground, when the upper part opened
like a V, leaving sufficient room for each person to pass
through. He next split the top of the other stick, and,
placing another short stick in the cleft, made a cross, which
he also forced into the ground. The funeral procession
climbed the mound on which the cemetery was situated,
passing through the V of the cleft stick in single file. As
soon as the coffin had been placed on the stage erected for
the purpose, the people commenced their return, following
on one another's heels as quickly as possible, each spitting
out the words, <q><foreign rend='italic'>Pit balli krat balli jat tesip bertatip!</foreign></q> (<q>Keep
back, and close out all things evil, and sickness</q>) as they
passed through the V-shaped stick. The whole party having
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
left the graveyard, the gate was closed by the simple process
of tying the cleft ends of the stick together, and a few words
were then said to the cross-stick, which they call <foreign rend='italic'>ngring</foreign>, or
the wall that separates the living from the dead. All who
had taken part in the ceremony then went and bathed before
returning to their homes, rubbing their skins with rough
pebbles, the old Mosaic idea of the uncleanness of the dead,
as mentioned in Numbers (chap. xix.), evidently finding a
place among their religious beliefs. It is apparently a great
relief to their minds to think that they can shut out the
spirit of the deceased. They believe that the spirit of the
dead is not aware that life has left the body until a short
time after the coffin has been taken to the graveyard, and
then not until the spirit has had leisure to notice the clothes,
weapons, and other articles belonging to its earthly estate,
which are placed with the coffin. But before this takes
place the gate has been closed.</q><note place='foot'>C. Hose, <q>In the heart of Borneo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>The Geographical Journal</hi>, xvi. (1900)
pp. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare C. Hose and W.
McDougall, <hi rend='italic'>The Pagan Tribes of
Borneo</hi> (London, 1912), ii. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
where, after describing the ceremony
of passing through the cloven stick, the
writers add: <q>In this way the Kayans
symbolically prevent any of the uncanny
influences of the graveyard
following the party back to the house;
though they do not seem to be clear as
to whether it is the ghosts of the dead,
or the <foreign rend='italic'>Toh</foreign> of the neighbourhood, or
those which may have contributed to
his death, against whom these precautions
are taken.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The cleft
stick or
tree
through
which a
person
passes is a
barrier to
part him
from a
dangerous
foe; the
closing of
the cleft is
like shutting
the
door in the
face of a
pursuer.
But combined
with
this in the
case of
ruptured
patients
seems to be
the idea
that the
rupture
heals sympathetically
as the
cleft in the
tree closes.
Analogous
Roman
cure for
dislocation.</note>
Here the words uttered by the mourners in passing
through the cloven stick shew clearly that they believe the
stick to act as a barrier or fence, on the further side of
which they leave behind the ghost or other dangerous spirit
whose successful pursuit might entail sickness and death on
the survivors. Thus the passage of these Madang mourners
through the cleft stick is strictly analogous to the passage
of ruptured English children through a cleft ash-tree. Both
are simply ways of leaving an evil thing behind. Similarly
the subsequent binding up of the cloven stick in Borneo is
analogous to the binding up of the cloven ash-tree in England.
Both are ways of barricading the road against the
evil which is dogging your steps; having passed through
the doorway you slam the door in the face of your pursuer.
Yet it seems probable that the intention of binding up the
cleft in a tree through which a ruptured patient has been
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
passed is not merely that of shutting the door on the malady
conceived as a personal being; combined with this idea is
perhaps the notion that in virtue of the law of magical homoeopathy
the rupture in the body of the sufferer will close up
exactly in the same measure as the cleft in the tree closes up
through the force of bandages and of natural growth. That
this shade of meaning attaches to the custom is rendered
probable by a comparison of an ancient Roman cure for
dislocation, which has been preserved for us by the grave
authority of the elder Cato. He recommended that a green
reed, four or five feet long, should be taken, split down the
middle, and held by two men to the dislocated bones while
a curious and now unintelligible spell was recited; then,
when the spell had been recited and the aperture in the reed
had closed, the reed was to be tied to the dislocated limb,
and a perfect cure might be expected. Apparently it was
supposed that just as the two sides of the split reed came
together and coalesced after being held apart, so the dislocated
bones would come together and fit into their proper places.<note place='foot'>Cato, <hi rend='italic'>De agri cultura</hi>, 159 (pp.
106 sq. ed. H. Keil, Leipsic, 1884):
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Luxum siquod est, hac cantione sanum
fiet. Harundinem prende tibi viridem
P. III. aut quinque longam, mediam
diffinde, et duo homines teneant ad
coxendices. Incipe cantare in alio s. f.
moetas vaeta daries dardaries asiadarides
una petes, usque dum coeant.
Motas vaeta daries dardares astataries
dissunapiter, usque dum coeant. Ferrum
insuper jactato. Ubi coierint et
altera alteram tetigerint, id manu prehende
et dextera sinistra praecide, ad
luxum aut ad fracturam alliga, sanum
fiet.</foreign></q> The passage is obscure and perhaps
corrupt. It is not clear whether
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>usque dum coeant</foreign></q> and <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ubi coierint</foreign></q>
refer to the drawing together of the
bones or of the split portions of the
reed, but apparently the reference is
to the reed. The charm is referred to
by Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>, xvii. 267:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quippe cum averti grandines carmine
credant plerique, cujus verba inserere
non equidem serio ausim, quamquam a
Catone proditis contra luxata membra
jungenda harundinum fissurae.</foreign></q> Compare
J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
i. 186, ii. 1031 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other
examples
of creeping
through
narrow
openings
after a
death.</note>
But the usual idea in passing through a narrow aperture
as a cure or preventive of evil would seem to be
simply that of giving the slip to a dangerous pursuer. With
this intention, doubtless, the savage Thays of Tonquin
repair after a burial to the banks of a stream and there
creep through a triangle formed by leaning two reeds
against each other, while the sorcerer souses them with dirty
water. All the relations of the deceased must wash their
garments in the stream before they return home, and they
may not set foot in the house till they have shorn their hair
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
at the foot of the ladder. Afterwards the sorcerer comes
and sprinkles the whole house with water for the purpose of
expelling evil spirits.<note place='foot'>Pinabel, <q>Notes sur quelques
peuplades dépendant du Tong-King,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</hi>,
Septième Série, v. (Paris, 1884) p.
430; A. Bourlet, <q>Funérailles chez
les Thay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, viii. (1913) p.
45.</note> Here again we cannot doubt that
the creeping through the triangle of reeds is intended to
rid the mourners of the troublesome ghost. So when the
Kamtchatkans had disposed of a corpse after their usual
fashion by throwing it to the dogs to be devoured, they
purified themselves as follows. They went into the forest
and cut various roots which they bent into rings, and through
these rings they crept twice. Afterwards they carried the
rings back to the forest and flung them away westward.
The Koryaks, a people of the same region, burn their dead
and hold a festival in honour of the departed a year after
the death. At this festival, which takes place on the spot
where the corpse was burned, or, if that is too far off, on a
neighbouring height, they sacrifice two young reindeer which
have never been in harness, and the sorcerer sticks a great
many reindeer horns in the earth, believing that thereby
he is dispatching a whole herd of these animals to their
deceased friend in the other world. Then they all hasten
home, and purify themselves by passing between two poles
planted in the ground, while the sorcerer strikes them with
a stick and adjures death not to carry them off.<note place='foot'>S. Krascheninnikow, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung
des Landes Kamtschatka</hi> (Lemgo,
1766), pp. 268, 282.</note> The
Tokoelawi in the interior of Central Celebes hold a great
sacrificial festival on the eighth day after the death of a man
or the ninth day after the death of a woman. When the
guests return homewards after the festival they pass under
two poles placed in a slanting direction against each other,
and they may not look round at the house where the death
occurred. <q>In this way they take a final leave of the soul
of the deceased. Afterwards no more sacrifices are offered
to the soul.</q><note place='foot'>N. Adriani en Alb. C. Kruijt,
<q>Van Posso naar Parigi, Sigi en
Lindoe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlii. (1898) p. 502. The poles are of
a certain plant or tree called <foreign rend='italic'>bomba</foreign>.</note> Among the Toboengkoe, another tribe in the
interior of Central Celebes, when a man buries his wife, he
goes to the grave by a different road from that along which
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
the corpse is carried; and on certain days afterwards he
bathes, and on returning from the bath must pass through
a teepee-shaped erection, which is formed by splitting a pole up
the middle and separating the two split pieces except at the
top. <q>This he must do in order that his second wife, if he
has one, may not soon die.</q><note place='foot'>Alb. C. Kruijt, <q>Eenige ethnografische
aanteekeningen omtrent de
Toboengkoe en de Tomori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xliv. (1900) p.
223.</note> Here the notion probably is
that the jealous ghost of the dead wife seeks to avenge herself
on her living rival by carrying off her soul with her to
deadland. Hence to prevent this catastrophe the husband
tries to evade the ghost, first by going to the grave along a
different path, and second by passing under a cleft stick,
through which as usual the spirit cannot follow him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The intention
of the
custom
probably is
to escape
from the
ghost of
the dead.</note>
In the light of the foregoing customs, as well as of a multitude
of ceremonies observed for a similar purpose in all parts
of the world,<note place='foot'>For examples of these ceremonies
I may refer to my article, <q>On certain
burial customs as illustrative of the
primitive theory of the soul,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xv.
(1886) pp. 64 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> we may safely assume that when people creep
through rings after a death or pass between poles after a
sacrifice to the dead, their intention simply is to interpose
a barrier between themselves and the ghost; they make
their way through a narrow pass or aperture through which
they hope that the ghost will not be able to follow them.
To put it otherwise, they conceive that the spirit of the dead
is sticking to them like a burr, and that like a burr it may
be rubbed or scraped off and left adhering to the sides of
the opening through which they have squeezed themselves.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Passing
through
an archway
in order
to escape
from
demons. Crawling
under an
arch of
bramble
as a cure
for various
maladies.
Crawling
under
arches
of various
sorts as
a cure or
preventive
of sickness.</note>
Similarly, when a pestilence is raging among the Koryaks,
they kill a dog, wind its guts about two poles, and pass
between the poles,<note place='foot'>S. Krascheninnikow, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung
des Landes Kamtschatka</hi> (Lemgo, 1766),
pp. 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> doubtless for the sake of giving the slip
to the demon of the plague in the same way that they give
the slip to the ghost. When the Kayans of Borneo have
been dogged by an evil spirit on a journey and are nearing
their destination, they fashion a small archway of boughs,
light a fire under it, and pass in single file under the archway
and over the fire, spitting into the fire as they pass. By
this ceremony, we are told, <q>they thoroughly exorcise the
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
evil spirits and emerge on the other side free from all baleful
influences.</q><note place='foot'>W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore in
Borneo, a Sketch</hi>, p. 28 (Wallingford,
Pennsylvania, 1899, privately
printed). Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Home-life
of Borneo Head-hunters</hi> (Philadelphia,
1902), p. 28: <q>Here a halt
for final purification was made. An
arch of boughs about five feet high was
erected on the beach, and beneath it a
fire was kindled, and then Tama Bulan,
holding a young chicken, which he
waved and brushed over every portion
of the arch, invoked all evil spirits
which had been accompanying us, and
forbade them to follow us further
through the fire. The fowl was then
killed, its blood smeared all over the
archway and sprinkled in the fire;
then, led by Tama Bulan, the whole
party filed under the arch, and as they
stepped over the fire each one spat in
it vociferously and immediately took
his place in the boats.</q></note> Here, to make assurance doubly sure, a fire as
well as an archway is interposed between the travellers and
the dreadful beings who are walking unseen behind. To crawl
under a bramble which has formed an arch by sending down
a second root into the ground, is an English and Welsh cure
for whooping-cough, rheumatism, boils, and other complaints.
In some parts of the west of England they say that to get rid
of boils the thing to do is to crawl through such a natural arch
nine times against the sun; but in Devonshire the patient
should creep through the arch thrice with the sun, that is
from east to west. When a child is passed through it for
whooping-cough, the operators ought to say:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>In bramble, out cough,</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Here I leave the whooping-cough.</hi></q><note place='foot'>T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>English
Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1884), pp. 171 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
W. G. Black, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi> (London,
1883), p. 70; R. Hunt, <hi rend='italic'>Popular
Romances of the West of England</hi>,
Third Edition (London, 1881), pp.
412, 415; Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
and Folk-stories of Wales</hi> (London,
1909), p. 320.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In Perigord and other parts of France the same cure is
employed for boils.<note place='foot'>A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes et
Traditions des Provinces de France</hi>
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 152; H.
Gaidoz, <hi rend='italic'>Un Vieux Rite médical</hi> (Paris,
1892), pp. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Bulgaria, when a person suffers from
a congenital malady such as scrofula, a popular cure is to
take him to a neighbouring village and there make him creep
naked thrice through an arch, which is formed by inserting
the lower ends of two vine branches in the ground and joining
their upper ends together. When he has done so, he hangs
his clothes on a tree, and dons other garments. On his way
home the patient must also crawl under a ploughshare,
which is held high enough to let him pass.<note place='foot'>A. Strausz, <hi rend='italic'>Die Bulgaren</hi> (Leipsic,
1898), p. 414.</note> Further, when
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
whooping-cough is prevalent in a Bulgarian village, an old
woman will scrape the earth from under the root of a willow-tree.
Then all the children of the village creep through the
opening thus made, and a thread from the garment of each
of them is hung on the willow. Adults sometimes go through
the same ceremony after recovering from a dangerous illness.<note place='foot'>A. Strausz, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 404. As
to the Bulgarian custom of creeping
through a tunnel in a time of epidemic,
see above, vol. i. pp. 282-284.</note>
Similarly, when sickness is rife among some of the villages
to the east of Lake Nyassa, the inhabitants crawl through
an arch formed by bending a wand and inserting the two
ends in the ground. By way of further precaution they
wash themselves on the spot with medicine and water, and
then bury the medicine and the evil influence together in
the earth. The same ceremony is resorted to as a means of
keeping off evil spirits, wild beasts, and enemies.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Last Journals of David Livingstone
in Central Africa</hi> (London, 1874),
i. 60.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Custom in
Uganda of
causing a
sick man
to pass
through a
cleft stick
or a narrow
opening in
the doorway.</note>
In Uganda <q>sometimes a medicine-man directed a sick
man to provide an animal, promising that he would come and
transfer the sickness to the animal. The medicine-man would
then select a plantain-tree near the house, kill the animal by it,
and anoint the sick man with its blood, on his forehead, on
each side of his chest, and on his legs above the knees. The
plantain-tree selected had to be one that was about to bear
fruit, and the medicine-man would split the stem from near
the top to near the bottom, leaving a few inches not split
both at the top and at the bottom; the split stem would be
held open so that the sick man could step through it, and in
doing so he would leave his clothing at the plantain-tree, and
would run into the house without looking back. When he
entered the house, new clothes would be given him to wear.
The plantain, the clothing, and meat would be carried away
by the medicine-man, who would deposit the plantain-tree on
waste land, but would take the meat and clothing for himself.
Sometimes the medicine-man would kill the animal near the
hut, lay a stout stick across the threshold, and narrow the
doorway by partially filling it with branches of trees; he
would then put some of the blood on either side of the narrow
entrance, and some on the stick across the threshold, and
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
would also anoint with it the sick man, who would be taken
outside for the purpose. The patient would then re-enter
the house, letting his clothing fall off, as he passed through
the doorway. The medicine-man would carry away the
branches, the stick, the clothing, and the meat. The
branches and the stick he would cast upon waste land,
but the meat and the clothing he would keep for himself.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 343. Compare
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Notes on the Manners and
Customs of the Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxi.
(1901) p. 126; id., <q>Further Notes
on the Manners and Customs of the
Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902) pp.
42 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Here the notion of transferring the sickness to the animal is
plainly combined with, we may almost say overshadowed by
the notion that the ailment is left behind adhering to the
cleft plantain-stem or to the stick and branches of the narrow
opening through which the patient has made his way. That
obviously is why the plantain-stem or the stick and branches
are thrown away on waste land, lest they should infect other
people with the sickness which has been transferred to them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
custom
practised
by the Kai
of New
Guinea
and the
Looboos
of Sumatra
for the
purpose
of giving
the slip to
spiritual
pursuers.</note>
The Kai of German New Guinea attribute sickness to the
agency either of ghosts or of sorcerers, but suspicion always
falls at first on ghosts, who are deemed even worse than the
sorcerers. To cure a sick man they will sometimes cleave a
stick in the middle, leaving the two ends intact, and then oblige
the sufferer to insert his head through the cleft. After that
they stroke his whole body with the stick from head to foot.
<q>The stick with the soul-stuff of the ghosts is then hurled
away or otherwise destroyed, whereupon the sick man is
supposed to recover.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. Keysser, <q>Aus dem Leben
der Kaileute,</q> in R. Neuhauss's
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii. (Berlin, 1911)
pp. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here the ghosts who cause the sickness
are clearly supposed to be scraped from the patient's
body by means of the cleft stick, and to be thrown away or
destroyed with the implement. The Looboos, a primitive
tribe in the Mandailing district of Sumatra, stand in great
fear of the wandering spirits of the dead (<foreign rend='italic'>soemangots</foreign>). But
<q>they know all sorts of means of protecting themselves
against the unwelcome visits of the spirits. For example,
if a man has lost his way in the forest, he thinks that this
is the work of such a spirit (<foreign rend='italic'>soemangot</foreign>), who dogs the
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
wanderer and bedims his sight. So in order to throw the
malignant spirit off the track he takes a rattan and splits it
through the middle. By bending the rattan an opening is
made, through which he creeps. After that the rattan is
quickly stretched and the opening closes. By this procedure
the spirit (so they think) cannot find the opening
again and so cannot further follow his victim.</q><note place='foot'>J. Kreemer, <q>De Loeboes in
Mandailing,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indie</hi>,
lxvi. (1912) p. 327.</note> Here
therefore, the passage through a cleft stick is conceived in
the clearest way as an escape from a spiritual pursuer, and
the closing of the aperture when the fugitive has passed
through it is nothing but the slamming of the door in the
face of his invisible foe.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Passing
through
cleft sticks
in connexion
with
puberty
and circumcision.</note>
A similar significance is probably to be attached to
other cases of ceremonially passing through a cleft stick
even where the intention of the rite is not expressly alleged.
Thus among the Ovambo of German South-West Africa
young women who have become marriageable perform a
variety of ceremonies; among other things they dance in
the large and the small cattle-kraal. On quitting the
large cattle-kraal after the dance, and on entering and
quitting the small cattle-kraal, they are obliged to pass, one
after the other, through the fork of a cleft stick, of which
the two sides are held wide open by an old man.<note place='foot'>Hermann Tönjes, <hi rend='italic'>Ovamboland,
Land, Leute, Mission</hi> (Berlin, 1911),
pp. 139 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The writer was unable to
ascertain the meaning of the rite; the
natives would only say that it was their
custom.</note> Among
the Washamba of German East Africa, when a boy has
been circumcised, two women bring a long sugar-cane, which
still bears its leaves. The cane is split at some distance
from its upper and lower ends and the two sides are held
apart so as to form a cleft or opening; at the lower end
of the cleft a <foreign rend='italic'>danga</foreign> ring is fastened. The father and mother
of the circumcised youth now place the sugar-cane between
them, touch the ring with their feet, and then slip through
the cleft; and after them the lad's aunt must also pass
through the cleft sugar-cane.<note place='foot'>A. Karasek, <q>Beiträge zur
Kenntnis der Waschambo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Baessler-Archiv</hi>,
i. (Leipsic and Berlin, 1911)
p. 192.</note> In both these cases the
passage through the cleft stick is probably intended to give
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
the slip to certain dangerous spirits, which are apt to molest
people at such critical seasons as puberty and circumcision.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Crawling
through a
ring or
hoop as a
cure or
preventive
of disease.
Passing
sheep
through
a hoop
of rowan. Milking
a cow
through
a natural
wooden
ring or a
<q>witch's
nest.</q>
Passing
sick
persons
or animals
through
a ring
of yarn.
Passing
diseased
children
through
a coil. Passing
through
a hemlock
ring during
an epidemic.
Passing
through a
ring of red-hot
iron to
escape an
evil spirit.</note>
Again, the passage through a ring or hoop is resorted
to for like reasons as a mode of curing or preventing disease.
Thus in Sweden, when a natural ring has been found in a
tree, it is carefully removed and treasured in the family; for
sick and especially rickety children are healed by merely
passing through it.<note place='foot'>H. F. Feilberg, <q>Zwieselbäume
nebst verwandtem Aberglauben in
Skandinavien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift des Vereins
für Volkskunde</hi>, vii. (1897) pp. 49
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A young married woman in Sweden,
who suffered from an infirmity, was advised by a wise
woman to steal three branches of willow, make them into
a hoop, and creep through it naked, taking care not to touch
the hoop and to keep perfectly silent. The hoop was afterwards
to be burnt. She carried out the prescription faithfully,
and her faith was rewarded by a perfect cure.<note place='foot'>H. F. Feilberg, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 44.</note> No doubt her
infirmity was thought to adhere to the hoop and to be burnt
with it. Similarly in Scotland children who suffered from
hectic fever and consumptive patients used to be healed by
passing thrice through a circular wreath of woodbine, which
was cut during the increase of the March moon and was let
down over the body of the sufferer from the head to the feet.
Thus Jonet Stewart cured sundry women by <q>taking ane
garland of grene woodbynd, and causing the patient pas
thryis throw it, quhilk thairefter scho cut in nyne pieces, and
cast in the fyre.</q> Another wise woman transmitted the sick
<q>throw are girth of woodbind thryis thre times, saying, <q>I
do this in name of the Father, the Sone, and the Halie
Ghaist.</q></q><note place='foot'>J. G. Dalyell, <hi rend='italic'>The Darker Superstitions
of Scotland</hi> (Edinburgh, 1834),
p. 121; Ch. Rogers, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life in
Scotland</hi> (Edinburgh, 1884-1886), iii.
239.</note> The Highlanders of Strathspey used to force
all their sheep and lambs to pass through a hoop of
rowan-tree on All Saints' Day and Beltane (the first of
November and the first of May),<note place='foot'>John Ramsay of Ochtertyre, <hi rend='italic'>Scotland
and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth
Century</hi>, edited by A. Allardyce,
(Edinburgh and London, 1888), ii.
454. Immediately after mentioning
this custom the writer adds: <q>And in
Breadalbane it is the custom for the
dairymaid to drive the cattle to the
sheals with a wand of that tree [the
rowan] cut upon the day of removal,
which is laid above the door until the
cattle be going back again to the winter-town.
This was reckoned a preservative
against witchcraft.</q> As to the activity
of witches and fairies on Hallowe'en and
the first of May, see above, vol. i. pp.
226 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 295; <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. G.
Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions of the Highlands
and Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow,
1900), p. 18; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1902),
p. 270. As to the power of the
rowan-tree to counteract their spells,
see W. Gregor, <hi rend='italic'>Notes on the Folk-lore
of the North-East of Scotland</hi> (London,
1881), p. 188; J. C. Atkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Forty
Years in a Moorland Parish</hi> (London,
1891), pp. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>The Scapegoat</hi>, pp.
266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> probably as a means of
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
warding off the witches and fairies, who are especially
dreaded at these seasons, and against whose malignant arts
the rowan-tree affords an efficient protection. In Oldenburg
when a cow gives little or no milk, they milk her through a
hole in a branch. In Eversten they say that this should be
done through a ring which an oak-tree has formed round the
scar where a branch has been sawn off. Others say the
beast should be milked through a <q>witch's nest,</q> that is,
through the boughs of a birch-tree which have grown in a
tangle. Such a <q>witch's nest</q> is also hung up in a pig's stye
to protect the pig against witchcraft.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>
(Oldenburg, 1867), i. p. 364, § 241.</note> Hence the aim of
milking a cow through a <q>witch's nest</q> or through a natural
wooden ring is no doubt to deliver the poor creature from
an artful witch who has been draining away the milk into
her own pail, as witches are too apt to do. Again, in
Oldenburg sick children, and also adults and animals, are
passed through a ring of rough unwashed yarn, just as it
comes from the reel. To complete the cure you should
throw a hot coal thrice through the ring, then spit through
it thrice, and finally bury the yarn under a stone, where you
leave it to rot. The writer who reports these remedies explains
them as intended to strip the witchcraft, as you might
say, from the bodies of the victims, whether human or animal,
on whom the witch has cast her spell.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. p. 364,
§ 240.</note> Among the Lushais
of Assam <q>five to ten days after the child is born its body
is said to be covered with small pimples, its lips become
black and its strength decreases. The family then obtain
a particular kind of creeping plant called <foreign rend='italic'>vawm</foreign>, which they
make into a coil. In the evening everything in the house
that has a lid or covering is uncovered, and the child is thrice
passed through this coil, which act is supposed to clear the
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
child's skin and restore its strength. After this is finished,
the parents go to bed and the pots or other receptacles are
covered again by any of the other members of the family.
The parents themselves must not replace any of these lids
for fear that they might shut up the spirit of the child in
them.</q><note place='foot'>Lieutenant-Colonel H. W. G.
Cole, <q>The Lushais,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Census of
India</hi>, 1911, vol. iii. <hi rend='italic'>Assam</hi>, Part i.
<hi rend='italic'>Report</hi> (Shillong, 1912), p. 140.</note> When the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia
fear the outbreak of an epidemic, a medicine-man takes a
large ring of hemlock branches and causes every member of
the tribe to pass through it. Each person puts his head
through the ring and then moves the ring downwards over
his body till it has almost reached his feet, when he steps
out of it, right foot first. They think that this prevents the
epidemic from breaking out.<note place='foot'>Franz Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Eleventh Report
on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>,
pp. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (separate reprint from the
<hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science</hi>, Liverpool
meeting, 1896).</note> In Asia Minor, <q>if a person
is believed to be possessed by an evil spirit, one form of
treatment is to heat an iron-chain red-hot, form it into a ring
and pass the afflicted person through the opening, on the
theory that the evil spirit cannot pass the hot chain, and
so is torn from his victim and left behind.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. G. E. White, Dean of Anatolia
College, <hi rend='italic'>Survivals of Primitive
Religion among the People of Asia
Minor</hi>, p. 12 (paper read before the
Victoria Institute or Philosophical
Society of Great Britain, 6 Adelphi
Terrace, Strand, London).</note> Here the
intention of the passage through the aperture is avowedly
to shake off a spiritual pursuer, who is deterred from
further pursuit not only by the narrowness of the opening
but by the risk of burning himself in the attempt to make
his way through it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Crawling
through
holed
stones as
a cure in
Scotland
and
Cornwall.</note>
But if the intention of these ceremonies is essentially to
rid the performer of some harmful thing, whether a disease
or a ghost or a demon, which is supposed to be clinging to
him, we should expect to find that any narrow hole or
opening would serve the purpose as well as a cleft tree or
stick, an arch or ring of boughs, or a couple of posts fixed
in the ground. And this expectation is not disappointed.
On the coast of Morven and Mull thin ledges of rock may
be seen pierced with large holes near the sea. Consumptive
people used to be brought thither, and after the tops of nine
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
waves had been caught in a dish and thrown on the patient's
head, he was made to pass through one of the rifted rocks
thrice in the direction of the sun.<note place='foot'>John Ramsay, <hi rend='italic'>Scotland and Scotsmen
in the Eighteenth Century</hi>, edited
by Alex. Allardyce (Edinburgh, 1888),
ii. 451 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> <q>On the farm of
Crossapol in Coll there is a stone called <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Clach Thuill</foreign>,
that is, the Hole Stone, through which persons suffering
from consumption were made to pass three times in the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. They took
meat with them each time, and left some on the stone.
The bird that took the food away had the consumption
laid upon it. Similar stones, under which the patient can
creep, were made use of in other islands.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1902),
p. 100.</note> Here it is
manifest that the patient left his disease behind him on the
stone, since the bird which carried off the food from the
stone caught the disease. In the Aberdeenshire river Dee,
at Cambus o' May, near Ballater, there is a rock with a hole
in it large enough to let a person pass through. Legend
runs that childless women used to wade out to the stone
and squeeze themselves through the hole. It is said that a
certain noble lady tried the effect of the charm not very many
years ago with indifferent success.<note place='foot'>Mr. James S. Greig, in a letter to
me dated Lindean, Perth Road,
Dundee, 17th August, 1913.</note> In the parish of Madern
in Cornwall, near the village of Lanyon, there is a perforated
stone called the <foreign lang='kw' rend='italic'>Mên-an-tol</foreign> or <q>holed stone,</q> through which
people formerly crept as a remedy for pains in the back and
limbs; and at certain times of the year parents drew their
children through the hole to cure them of the rickets.<note place='foot'>W. Borlase, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquities, historical
and monumental, of the County of Cornwall</hi>
(London, 1769), pp. 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The passage through the stone was also deemed a cure for
scrofula, provided it was made against the sun and repeated
three times or three times three.<note place='foot'>Robert Hunt, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Romances
of the West of England</hi>, Third Edition
(London, 1881), pp. 176, 415.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Crawling
through
holed
stones as
a cure in
France.</note>
Near the little town of Dourgne, not far from Castres,
in Southern France, there is a mountain, and on the top
of the mountain is a tableland, where a number of large
stones may be seen planted in the ground about a cross
and rising to a height of two to five feet above the
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
ground. Almost all of them are pierced with holes of
different sizes. From time immemorial people used to assemble
at Dourgne and the neighbourhood every year on
the sixth of August, the festival of St. Estapin. The palsied,
the lame, the blind, the sick of all sorts, flocked thither
to seek and find a cure for their various infirmities. Very
early in the morning they set out from the villages where
they had lodged or from the meadows where for want of
better accommodation they had been forced to pass the
night, and went on pilgrimage to the chapel of St. Estapin,
which stands in a gorge at the southern foot of the mountain.
Having gone nine times in procession round the chapel, they
hobbled, limped, or crawled to the tableland on the top of
the mountain. There each of them chose a stone with a
hole of the requisite size and thrust his ailing member
through the hole. For there are holes to suit every complaint;
some for the head, some for the arm, some for the
leg, and so on. Having performed this simple ceremony
they were cured; the lame walked, the blind saw, the palsied
recovered the use of their limbs, and so on. The chapel of
the saint is adorned with the crutches and other artificial
aids, now wholly superfluous, which the joyful pilgrims left
behind them in token of their gratitude and devotion.<note place='foot'>Thomas-de-Saint-Mars, <q>Fête de
Saint Estapin,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Société
Royale des Antiquaires de France</hi>, i.
(1817) pp. 428-430.</note>
About two miles from Gisors, in the French department of
Oise, there is a dolmen called Trie or Trie- Chateau, consisting
of three upright stones with a fourth and larger stone
laid horizontally on their tops. The stone which forms the
back wall of the dolmen is pierced about the middle by an
irregularly shaped hole, through which the people of the
neighbourhood used from time immemorial to pass their
sickly children in the firm belief that the passage through
the stone would restore them to health.<note place='foot'>J. Deniker, <q>Dolmen et superstitions,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletins et Mémoires de la
Société d'Anthropologie de Paris</hi>, v.
série, i. (1900) p. 111. Compare
H. Gaidoz, <hi rend='italic'>Un Vieux Rite médical</hi>
(Paris, 1892), pp. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. Fouju,
<q>Légendes et Superstitions préhistoriques,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions Populaires</hi>,
xiv. (1899) pp. 477 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Crawling
through
holed
stones
as a cure
in Bavaria,
Austria,
and
Greece.</note>
In the church of St. Corona at the village of Koppenwal,
in Lower Bavaria, there is a hole in the stone on which the
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
altar rests. Through this hole, while service was going on,
the peasants used to creep, believing that having done so
they would not suffer from pains in their back at harvest.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi> (Munich, 1848-1855), ii.
48 § 61.</note>
In the crypt of the old cathedral at Freising in Bavaria
there is a tomb which is reputed to contain the relics of
St. Nonnosius. Between a pillar of the tomb and the
wall there is a narrow opening, through which persons
afflicted with pains in the back creep in order to obtain
thereby some mitigation of their pangs.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 431 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Upper Austria,
above the Lake of Aber, which is a sheet of dark-green
water nestling among wooded mountains, there stands
the Falkenstein chapel of St. Wolfgang built close to the
face of a cliff that rises from a little green dale. A
staircase leads up from the chapel to a narrow, dark,
dripping cleft in the rock, through which pilgrims creep
in a stooping posture <q>in the belief that they can strip
off their bodily sufferings or sins on the face of the rock.</q><note place='foot'>Marie Andree-Eysn, <hi rend='italic'>Volkskundliches
aus dem bayrisch-österreichischen
Alpengebiet</hi> (Brunswick, 1910), pp. 1,
9, with the illustrations on pp. 10, 11.</note>
Women with child also crawl through the hole, hoping
thus to obtain an easy delivery.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. 431.</note> In the Greek island
of Cythnos, when a child is sickly, the mother will take
it to a hole in a rock about half an hour distant from
Messaria. There she strips the child naked and pushes it
through the hole in the rock, afterwards throwing away the
old garments and clothing the child in new ones.<note place='foot'>J. Theodore Bent, <hi rend='italic'>The Cyclades</hi>
(London, 1885), p. 437.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Crawling
through
holed
stones
as a cure
in Asia
Minor. Passing
through
various
narrow
openings
as a cure or
preventive
in India
and
Ireland.</note>
Near Everek, on the site of the ancient Caesarea in Asia
Minor, there is a rifted rock through which persons pass to rid
themselves of a cough.<note place='foot'>E. H. Carnoy et J. Nicolaides,
<hi rend='italic'>Traditions populaires de l'Asie Mineure</hi>
(Paris, 1889), p. 338.</note> A writer well acquainted with Asia
Minor has described how he visited <q>a well-known pool of
water tucked away in a beautiful nook high up among the
Anatolian mountains, and with a wide reputation for sanctity
and healing powers. We arrived just as the last of a flock
of three hundred sheep were being passed through a peculiar
hole in the thin ledge of a huge rock to deliver them
from a disease of the liver supposed to prevent the proper
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
laying on of fat.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. George E. White (of Marsovan,
Turkey), <hi rend='italic'>Present Day Sacrifices
in Asia Minor</hi>, p. 3 (reprinted from
<hi rend='italic'>The Hartford Seminary Record</hi>, February
1906).</note> Among the Kawars of the Central
Provinces in India a man who suffers from intermittent
fever will try to cure it by walking through a narrow
passage between two houses.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces, Ethnographic
Survey</hi>, vii. <hi rend='italic'>Draft Articles on Forest
Tribes</hi> (Allahabad, 1911), p. 46.</note> In a ruined church of St.
Brandon, about ten miles from Dingle, in the west of Ireland,
there is a narrow window, through which sick women pass
thrice in order to be cured.<note place='foot'>So my friend Dr. G. W. Prothero
informs me in a letter.</note> The Hindoos of the Punjaub
think that the birth of a son after three girls is unlucky for
the parents, and in order to avert the ill-luck they resort to
a number of devices. Amongst other things they break the
centre of a bronze plate and remove all but the rim; then
they pass the luckless child through the bronze rim. Moreover,
they make an opening in the roof of the room where
the birth took place, and then pull the infant out through
the opening; and further they pass the child under the sill
of the door.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Census of India, 1911</hi>, vol. xiv.
<hi rend='italic'>Punjab</hi>, Part i. <hi rend='italic'>Report</hi>, by Pandit
Harikishan Kaul (Lahore, 1912), p.
302.</note> By these passages through narrow apertures
they apparently hope to rid the child of the ill-luck which is
either pursuing it or sticking to it like a burr. For in this
case, as in many similar ones, it might be hard to say whether
the riddance is conceived as an escape from the pursuit of a
maleficent spirit or as the abrasion of a dangerous substance
which adheres to the person of the sufferer.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Crawling
through
holes in the
ground as
a cure for
disease. Passing
through
the yoke of
a chariot
as a cure
for skin
disease.</note>
Another way of ridding man and beast of the clinging
infection of disease is to pass them through a hole dug in
the ground. This mode of cure was practised in Europe
during the Middle Ages, and has survived in Denmark down
to modern times. In a sermon preached by St. Eloi, Bishop
of Noyon, in the sixth century, he forbade the faithful to
practise lustrations and to drive their sheep through hollow
trees and holes in the earth, <q>because by this they seem to
consecrate them to the devil.</q><note place='foot'>H. Gaidoz, <hi rend='italic'>Un Vieux Rite médical</hi>
(Paris, 1892), p. 10.</note> Theodore, Archbishop of
Canterbury, who died in 690 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, decreed that <q>if any one
for the health of his little son shall pass through a hole in
the ground and then close it behind him with thorns, let him
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
do penance for eleven days on bread and water.</q><note place='foot'>H. Gaidoz, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 21.</note> Here
the closing of the hole with thorns after the patient or his
representative has passed through is plainly intended to
barricade the narrow way against the pursuit of sickness
personified as a demon; hence it confirms the general
interpretation here given of these customs. Again, Burchard,
Bishop of Worms, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1025, repeated the same
condemnation: <q>Hast thou done what certain women are
wont to do? I mean those who have squalling babes;
they dig the earth and pierce it, and through that hole they
drag the babe, and they say that thus the squalling babe
ceases to squall. If thou has done this or consented unto
it, thou shalt do penance for fifteen days on bread and
water.</q><note place='foot'>H. Gaidoz, <hi rend='italic'>Un Vieux Rite médical</hi>
(Paris, 1892), p. 21. Compare J.
Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 975
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Fünen in Denmark, as late as the latter part of
the nineteenth century, a cure for childish ailments was to
dig up several sods, arrange them so as to form a hole,
and then to pass the sick child through it.<note place='foot'>H. F. Feilberg, <q>Zwieselbäume
nebst verwandtem Aberglaube in
Skandinavien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift des Vereins
für Volkskunde</hi>, vii. (1897) p. 45.</note> A simplified
form of this cure is adopted in Jutland. At twelve o'clock
on a Thursday night you go to a churchyard, dig up a
circular piece of turf, and make a hole in it large enough
to permit the passage through it of your infant progeny.
Taking the sod with you, go home, salute nobody on the
way, and speak to nobody. On getting to your house,
take the child and pass it thrice through the turf from right
to left; then take the turf back to the churchyard and
replace it in position. If the turf takes root and grows
afresh, the child will recover; but if the turf withers, there is
no hope. Elsewhere it is at the hour of sunset rather than
of midnight that people cut the turf in the churchyard. The
same cure is applied to cattle which have been bewitched;
though naturally in that case you must cut a much bigger
turf and make a much bigger hole in it to let a horse or a
cow through than is necessary for an infant.<note place='foot'>H. Gaidoz, <hi rend='italic'>Un Vieux Rite médical</hi>
(Paris, 1892), pp. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, referring to
Nyrop, in <hi rend='italic'>Dania</hi>, i. No. 1 (Copenhagen,
1890), pp. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Here, again,
the conception of a sympathetic relation, established between
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
the sufferer and the thing which has rid him of his ailment,
comes out clearly in the belief, that if the turf through which
the child has been passed thrives, the child will thrive also,
but that if the turf withers, the child will die. Among the
Corannas, a people of the Hottentot race on the Orange
River, <q>when a child recovers from a dangerous illness, a
trench is dug in the ground, across the middle of which an
arch is thrown, and an ox made to stand upon it; the child
is then dragged under the arch. After this ceremony the
animal is killed, and eaten by married people who have
children, none else being permitted to participate of the
feast.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. John Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in
South Africa, Second Journey</hi> (London,
1822), ii. 346. Among the same
people <q>when a person is ill, they
bring an ox to the place where he is
laid. Two cuts are then made in one
of its legs, extending down the whole
length of it. The skin in the middle
of the leg being raised up, the operator
thrusts in his hand, to make way for
that of the sick person, whose whole
body is afterwards rubbed over with
the blood of the animal. The ox after
enduring this torment is killed, and
those who are married and have children,
as in the other case, are the only
partakers of the feast.</q> (J. Campbell,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 346 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). Here the intention
seems to be not so much to
transfer the disease to the ox, as to
transfuse the healthy life of the beast
into the veins of the sick man. The
same is perhaps true of the Welsh and
French cure for whooping-cough, which
consists in passing the little sufferer
several times under an ass. See J.
Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of Great
Britain</hi> (London, 1882-1883), iii. 288;
L. J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, in <hi rend='italic'>Bulletins
de la Société d'Anthropologie de Paris</hi>,
Quatrième Série, i. (1890) p. 897;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions et Survivances</hi> (Paris,
1896), i. 526. The same cure for whooping-cough
<q>is also practised in Ireland;
only here the sufferer is passed round,
that is, over and under, the body of
an ass</q> (letter of Miss A. H. Singleton
to me, dated Rathmagle House, Abbey-Leix,
Ireland, 24th February 1904).
But perhaps the intention rather is to
give the whooping-cough to the animal;
for it might reasonably be thought that
the feeble whoop of the sick child would
neither seriously impair the lungs, nor
perceptibly augment the stentorian bray,
of the donkey.</note> Here the attempt to leave the sickness behind in
the hole, which is probably the essence of the ceremony,
may perhaps be combined with an endeavour to impart to
the child the strength and vigour of the animal. Ancient
India seems also to have been familiar with the same
primitive notion that sickness could, as it were, be stripped
off the person of the sufferer by passing him through a
narrow aperture; for in the Rigveda it is said that Indra
cured Apala of a disease of the skin by drawing her through
the yoke of the chariot; <q>thus the god made her to have a
golden skin, purifying her thrice.</q><note place='foot'>H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion des
Veda</hi> (Berlin, 1894), p. 495. According
to a fuller account, Indra drew
her through three holes, that of a war-chariot, that of a cart, and that of a
yoke. See W. Caland, <hi rend='italic'>Altindisches
Zauberritual</hi> (Amsterdam, 1900), p. 31
note 5.</note>
</p>

<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Passing
under a
yoke or
arch as
a rite of
initiation.</note>
At the small village of Damun, on the Kabenau river,
in German New Guinea, a traveller witnessed the natives
performing a ceremony of initiation, of which the following
rite formed part. The candidates for initiation, six in
number, were boys and lads of various ages from about
four years of age to sixteen or seventeen. The company
betook themselves to the bed of a small stream, where at
the end of a gully a hollow in the rocks formed a natural
basin. At the entrance to the gully a sort of yoke, so the
traveller calls it, was erected by means of some poles, and
from the cross-piece plants were hung so as to make an arch.
One of the men took up his station in front of the arch, and
as each candidate came up, the man seized him, spat on his
breast and back a clot of red spittle, and gave him several
severe blows with the stock of a plant. After that the
candidate, who had previously stripped himself naked, passed
under the leafy arch and bathed in the rocky pool at the
other end of the gully. All the time that this solemnity
was proceeding another man sat perched on a neighbouring
rock, beating a drum and singing. Only men took part in
the ceremony.<note place='foot'>Dr. E. Werner, <q>Im westlichen
Finsterregebirge und an der Nordküste
von Deutsch-Neuginea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Petermanns
Mitteilungen</hi>, lv. (1909) pp. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Among some tribes of South-Eastern
Australia it was customary at the
ceremonies of initiation to bend growing
saplings into arches and compel
the novices to pass under them; sometimes
the youths had to crawl on
the ground to get through. See
A. W. Howitt, <q>On some Australian
ceremonies of Initiation,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xiii. (1884)
p. 445; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East
Australia</hi> (London, 1904), p. 536.</note> Though no explanation of the ceremony is
given by the observer who witnessed it, we may suppose
that by passing under the yoke or arch the novices were
supposed to rid themselves of certain evil influences, whether
conceived as spiritual or not, which they left behind them
on the further side of the barrier. This interpretation is
confirmed by the bath which each candidate took immediately
afterwards. In short the whole purpose of the rite
would seem to have been purificatory.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
ancient
Roman
custom
of passing
enemies
under a
yoke was
probably
in origin a
ceremony
of purification
rather than
of degradation.</note>
With the preceding examples before us, it seems worth
while to ask whether the ancient Italian practice of making
conquered enemies to pass under a yoke may not in its
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
origin have been a purificatory ceremony, designed to rid
the foe of some uncanny powers before dismissing him to
his home. For apparently the ceremony was only observed
with prisoners who were about to be released;<note place='foot'>Livy iii. 28, ix. 6, x. 36;
Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Roman.</hi> iii. 22. 7. The so-called yoke
in this case consisted of two spears or
two beams set upright in the ground,
with a third spear or beam laid transversely
across them. See Livy iii. 28;
Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> had it been
a mere mark of ignominy, there seems to be no reason
why it should not have been inflicted also on men who
were doomed to die. This conjectural explanation of the
ceremony is confirmed by the tradition that the Roman
Horatius was similarly obliged by his fellow-countrymen to
pass under a yoke as a form of purification for the murder
of his sister. The yoke by passing under which he cleansed
himself from his sister's blood was still to be seen in Rome
when Livy was writing his history under the emperor
Augustus. It was an ancient wooden beam spanning a
narrow lane in an old quarter of the city, the two ends of
the beam being built into the masonry of the walls on
either side; it went by the name of the Sister's Beam, and
whenever the wood decayed and threatened to fall, the
venerable monument, which carried back the thoughts of
passers-by to the kingly age of Rome, was repaired at the
public expense.<note place='foot'>Livy i. 26: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Itaque, ut caedes
manifesta aliquo tamen piaculo lueretur,
imperatum patri, ut filium expiaret
pecunia publica. Is quibusdam piacularibus
sacrificiis factis, quae deinde
genti Horatiae tradita sunt, transmisso
per viam tigillo capite adoperto velut
sub jugum misit juvenem. Id hodie
quoque publice semper refectum manet;
sororium tigillum vocant</foreign>;</q> Festus, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<q>Sororium Tigillum,</q> pp. 297, 307,
ed. C. O. Müller (Leipsic, 1839);
Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Roman.</hi> iii. 22. The position of the
beam is described exactly by the last
of these writers, who had evidently
seen it. According to Festus, the
yoke under which Horatius passed was
composed of three beams, two uprights,
and a cross-piece. The similarity of
the ceremony to that which was exacted
from conquered foes is noted by
Dionysius Halicarnasensis as well as
by Livy. The tradition of the purification
has been rightly explained by
Dr. W. H. Roscher with reference to
the custom of passing through cleft
trees, holed stones, and so on. See
W. H. Roscher, <hi rend='italic'>Ausführliches Lexikon
der griech. und röm. Mythologie</hi>, ii.
(Leipsic, 1890-1897) col. 21. Compare
G. Wissowa, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Kultus
der Römer</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Munich, 1912), p. 104.</note> If our interpretation of these customs is
right, it was the ghost of his murdered sister whom the
Roman hero gave the slip to by passing under the yoke;
and it may have been the angry ghosts of slaughtered
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
Romans from whom the enemy's soldiers were believed to
be delivered when they marched under the yoke before
being dismissed by their merciful conquerors to their homes.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similarly
the passage
of a victorious
Roman
army
under a
triumphal
arch may
have been
intended to
purify the
men from
the stain of
bloodshed
by interposing
a
barrier
between
the slayers
and the
angry
ghosts of
the slain.</note>
In a former part of this work we saw that homicides in
general and victorious warriors in particular are often
obliged to perform a variety of ceremonies for the purpose
of ridding them of the dangerous ghosts of their victims.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</hi>,
pp. 165 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
If the ceremony of passing under the yoke was primarily
designed, as I have suggested, to free the soldiers from the
angry ghosts of the men whom they had slain, we should
expect to find that the victorious Romans themselves
observed a similar ceremony after a battle for a similar
purpose. Was this the original meaning of passing under a
triumphal arch? In other words, may not the triumphal
arch have been for the victors what the yoke was for the
vanquished, a barrier to protect them against the pursuit of
the spirits of the slain? That the Romans felt the need
of purification from the taint of bloodshed after a battle
appears from the opinion of Masurius, mentioned by Pliny,
that the laurel worn by soldiers in a triumphal procession
was intended to purge them from the slaughter of the
enemy.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Natur. Histor.</hi> xv. 135:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quia suffimentum sit caedis hostium
et purgatio</foreign>.</q></note> A special gate, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Porta Triumphalis</foreign>, was reserved
for the entrance of a victorious army into Rome;<note place='foot'>Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>In Pisonem</hi>, xxiii. 55;
Josephus, <hi rend='italic'>Bellum Judaicum</hi>, vii. 5. 4.</note> and it
would be in accordance with ancient religious views if this
distinction was originally not so much an honour conferred
as a precaution enforced to prevent the ordinary gates from
being polluted by the passage of thousands of blood-guilty
men.<note place='foot'>It was not till after I had given
this conjectural explanation of the
<q>Sister's Beam</q> and the triumphal
arch at Rome that I read the article
of Mr. W. Warde Fowler, <q>Passing
under the Yoke</q> (<hi rend='italic'>The Classical Review</hi>,
March 1913, pp. 48-51), in
which he quite independently suggests
practically the same explanation of
both these Roman structures. I have
left my exposition, except for one or
two trivial verbal changes, exactly as
it stood before I was aware that my
friend had anticipated me in both conjectures.
The closeness of the coincidence
between our views is a welcome
confirmation of their truth. As to
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Porta Triumphalis</foreign>, the exact
position of which is uncertain, Mr.
Warde Fowler thinks that it was not a
gate in the walls, but an archway
standing by itself in the Campus
Martius outside the city walls. He
points out that in the oldest existing
triumphal arch, that of Augustus at
Ariminum, the most striking part of
the structure consists of two upright
Corinthian pillars with an architrave
laid horizontally across them; and he
ingeniously conjectures that we have
here a reminiscence of the two uprights
and the cross-piece, which, if our theory
is correct, was the original form both
of the triumphal arch and of the yoke.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. The External Soul in Animals.'/>
<head>§ 3. The External Soul in Animals.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief in
a sympathetic
relation
between a
man and
an animal
such that
the fate
of the one
depends
on that of
the other.
The external
souls
of Yakut
shamans
in animals. Sympathetic
relation
between
witches
and hares.</note>
But in practice, as in folk-tales, it is not merely with
inanimate objects and plants that a person is occasionally
believed to be united by a bond of physical sympathy.
The same bond, it is supposed, may exist between a man
and an animal, so that the welfare of the one depends on
the welfare of the other, and when the animal dies the man
dies also. The analogy between the custom and the tales
is all the closer because in both of them the power of thus
removing the soul from the body and stowing it away in an
animal is often a special privilege of wizards and witches.
Thus the Yakuts of Siberia believe that every shaman or
wizard keeps his soul, or one of his souls, incarnate in an
animal which is carefully concealed from all the world.
<q>Nobody can find my external soul,</q> said one famous
wizard, <q>it lies hidden far away in the stony mountains
of Edzhigansk.</q> Only once a year, when the last snows
melt and the earth turns black, do these external souls of
wizards appear in the shape of animals among the dwellings
of men. They wander everywhere, yet none but wizards
can see them. The strong ones sweep roaring and noisily
along, the weak steal about quietly and furtively. Often
they fight, and then the wizard whose external soul is
beaten, falls ill or dies. The weakest and most cowardly
wizards are they whose souls are incarnate in the shape of
dogs, for the dog gives his human double no peace, but
gnaws his heart and tears his body. The most powerful
wizards are they whose external souls have the shape of
stallions, elks, black bears, eagles, or boars. Again, the
Samoyeds of the Turukhinsk region hold that every shaman
has a familiar spirit in the shape of a boar, which he leads
about by a magic belt. On the death of the boar the
shaman himself dies; and stories are told of battles between
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
wizards, who send their spirits to fight before they encounter
each other in person.<note place='foot'>Professor V. M. Mikhailoviskij,
<q>Shamanism in Siberia and European
Russia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxiv. (1895) pp. 133, 134.</note> In Yorkshire witches are thought to
stand in such peculiarly close relations to hares, that if a
particular hare is killed or wounded, a certain witch will at
the same moment be killed or receive a hurt in her
body exactly corresponding to the wound in the hare.<note place='foot'>Th. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Yorkshire Legends
and Traditions</hi>, Second Series (London,
1889), pp. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
However, this fancy is probably a case of the general
European belief that witches have the power of temporarily
transforming themselves into certain animals, particularly
hares and cats, and that any hurts inflicted on such transformed
animals are felt by the witches who are concealed in
the animals.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 315 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> But the notion that a person can temporarily
transform himself into an animal differs from the notion
that he can deposit his soul for a longer or shorter period in
an animal, while he himself retains the human form; though
in the cloudy mind of the peasant and the savage the two
ideas may not always be sharply distinguished. The
Malays believe that <q>the soul of a person may pass into
another person or into an animal, or rather that such a
mysterious relation can arise between the two that the fate
of the one is wholly dependent on that of the other.</q><note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Makassaarsch-Hollandsch
Woordenboek</hi> (Amsterdam,
1859), <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <foreign rend='italic'>soemāñgá</foreign>, p. 569; G. A.
Wilken, <q>Het animisme bij de volken
van den Indischen Archipel,</q> <hi rend='italic'>De
Indische Gids</hi>, June 1884, p. 933; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Verspreide Geschriften</hi> (The Hague,
1912), iii. 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Melanesian
conception
of the
<foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign>,
a person's
external
soul lodged
in an
animal
or other
object.</note>
Among the Melanesians of Mota, one of the New
Hebrides islands, the conception of an external soul is
carried out in the practice of daily life. The Mota word
for soul is <foreign rend='italic'>atai</foreign>. <q>The use of the word <foreign rend='italic'>atai</foreign> in Mota seems
properly and originally to have been to signify something
peculiarly and intimately connected with a person and
sacred to him, something that he has set his fancy upon
when he has seen it in what has seemed to him a wonderful
manner, or some one has shewn it to him as such. Whatever
the thing might be the man believed it to be the
reflection of his own personality; he and his <foreign rend='italic'>atai</foreign> flourished,
suffered, lived, and died together. But the word must not
be supposed to have been borrowed from this use and
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
applied secondarily to describe the soul; the word carries a
sense with it which is applicable alike to that second self,
the visible object so mysteriously connected with the man,
and to this invisible second self which we call the soul.
There is another Mota word, <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign>, which has almost if
not quite the same meaning as <foreign rend='italic'>atai</foreign> has when it describes
something animate or inanimate which a man has come to
believe to have an existence intimately connected with his
own. The word <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign> may be taken to be properly
<q>likeness,</q> and the noun form of the adverb <foreign rend='italic'>tama</foreign>, as, like.
It was not every one in Mota who had his <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign>; only
some men fancied that they had this relation to a lizard, a
snake, or it might be a stone; sometimes the thing was
sought for and found by drinking the infusion of certain
leaves and heaping together the dregs; then whatever
living thing was first seen in or upon the heap was the
<foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign>. It was watched but not fed or worshipped; the
natives believed that it came at call, and that the life of the
man was bound up with the life of his <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign>, if a living
thing, or with its safety; should it die, or if not living get
broken or be lost, the man would die. Hence in case of
sickness they would send to see if the <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign> was safe and
well. This word has never been used apparently for the
soul in Mota; but in Aurora in the New Hebrides it is the
accepted equivalent. It is well worth observing that both
the <foreign rend='italic'>atai</foreign> and the <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign>, and it may be added the Motlav
<foreign rend='italic'>talegi</foreign>, is something which has a substantial existence of its
own, as when a snake or stone is a man's <foreign rend='italic'>atai</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign>;
a soul then when called by these names is conceived of as
something in a way substantial.</q><note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, D.D., <hi rend='italic'>The
Melanesians</hi> (Oxford, 1891), pp. 250
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Notes on the
Customs of Mota, Banks Islands,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Transactions and Proceedings of the
Royal Society of Victoria</hi>, xvi. (1880)
p. 136.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sympathetic
relation
between
a man
and his
<foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign>
(external
soul).</note>
From this account, which we owe to the careful and
accurate researches of the Rev. Dr. Codrington, we gather
that while every person in Mota has a second self or external
soul in a visible object called an <foreign rend='italic'>atai</foreign>, only some people
have, it may be, a second external soul in another visible
object called a <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign>. We may conjecture that persons
who have a <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign> in addition to an <foreign rend='italic'>atai</foreign> are more than
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
usually anxious as to the state of their soul, and that they
seek to put it in perfect security by what we may call a
system of double insurance, calculating that if one of their
external souls should die or be broken, they themselves may
still survive by virtue of the survival of the other. Be that
as it may, the <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign> discharges two functions, one of them
defensive and the other offensive. On the one hand, so long
as it lives or remains unbroken, it preserves its owner in life;
and on the other hand it helps him to injure his enemies.
In its offensive character, if the <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign> happens to be an
eel, it will bite its owner's enemy; if it is a shark, it will
swallow him. In its defensive character, the state of the
<foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign> is a symptom or life-token of the state of the man;
hence when he is ill he will visit and examine it, or if he
cannot go himself he will send another to inspect it and
report. In either case the man turns the animal, if animal
it be, carefully over in order to see what is the matter with
it; should something be found sticking to its skin, it is
removed, and through the relief thus afforded to the creature
the sick man recovers. But if the animal should be found
dying, it is an omen of death for the man; for whenever it
dies he dies also.<note place='foot'>W. H. R. Rivers, <q>Totemism in
Polynesia and Melanesia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Royal Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxix. (1909) p. 177. Dr. Rivers
cites a recent case of a man who had a
large lizard for his <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign>. The
animal lived in the roots of a big
banyan-tree; when the man was ill,
the lizard also seemed unwell; and
when the man died, the tree fell, which
was deemed a sign that the lizard also
was dead.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Soul of a
Melanesian
doctor in
an eagle-hawk
and
a rat.</note>
In Melanesia a native doctor was once attending to a
sick man. Just then <q>a large eagle-hawk came soaring past
the house, and Kaplen, my hunter, was going to shoot it;
but the doctor jumped up in evident alarm, and said, <q>Oh,
don't shoot; that is my spirit</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>niog</foreign>, literally, my shadow);
<q>if you shoot that, I will die.</q> He then told the old man,
<q>If you see a rat to-night, don't drive it away, 'tis my spirit
(<foreign rend='italic'>niog</foreign>), or a snake which will come to-night, that also is my
spirit.</q></q><note place='foot'>George Brown, D.D., <hi rend='italic'>Melanesians
and Polynesians</hi> (London, 1910), p.
177. The case was known to Dr.
Brown, who made notes of it. The
part of Melanesia where it happened
was probably the Duke of York Island
or New Britain.</note> It does not appear whether the doctor in this
case, like the giant or warlock in the tales, kept his spirit
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
permanently in the bird or in the animal, or whether he only
transferred it temporarily to the creature for the purpose
of enabling him the better to work the cure, perhaps by
sending out his own soul in a bird or beast to find and bring
back the lost soul of the patient. In either case he seems
to have thought, like the giant or warlock in the stories, that
the death of the bird or the animal would simultaneously
entail his own. A family in Nauru, one of the Marshall
Islands, apparently imagine that their lives are bound up
with a species of large fish, which has a huge mouth and
devours human beings; for when one of these fish was killed,
the members of the family cried, <q>Our guardian spirit is
killed, now we must all die!</q><note place='foot'><q>Totemismus auf den Marshall-Inseln
(Südsee),</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, viii. (1913)
p. 251.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The theory
of an external
soul
lodged in
an animal
is very
prevalent
in West
Africa.
The soul of
a chief in a
hippopotamus
or a
black
snake. Belief of
the Fans
that every
wizard
unites his
life to that
of a wild
animal by
a rite of
blood
brotherhood.</note>
The theory of an external soul deposited in an animal
appears to be very prevalent in West Africa, particularly in
Nigeria, the Cameroons, and the Gaboon.<note place='foot'>Much of the following evidence
has already been cited by me in <hi rend='italic'>Totemism
and Exogamy</hi>, ii. 593 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In the latter part
of the nineteenth century two English missionaries, established
at San Salvador, the capital of the King of Congo, asked the
natives repeatedly whether any of them had seen the strange,
big, East African goat which Stanley had given to a chief at
Stanley Pool in 1877. But their enquiries were fruitless;
no native would admit that he had seen the goat. Some
years afterwards the missionaries discovered why they could
obtain no reply to their enquiry. All the people, it turned
out, imagined that the missionaries believed the spirit of the
King of Salvador to be contained in the goat, and that they
wished to obtain possession of the animal in order to exercise
an evil influence on his majesty.<note place='foot'>Herbert Ward, <hi rend='italic'>Five Years with
the Congo Cannibals</hi> (London, 1890),
p. 53.</note> The belief from the standpoint
of the Congo savages was natural enough, since in that
region some chiefs regularly link their fate to that of an
animal. Thus the Chief Bankwa of Ndolo, on the Moeko
River, had conferred this honour on a certain hippopotamus of
the neighbourhood, at which he would allow nobody to shoot.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Notes Analytiques sur les Collections
ethnographiques du Musée du
Congo</hi>, i. (Brussels, 1902-1906) p. 150.</note>
At the village of Ongek, in the Gaboon, a French missionary
slept in the hut of an old Fan chief. Awakened about two
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
in the morning by a rustling of dry leaves, he lit a torch,
when to his horror he perceived a huge black serpent of the
most dangerous sort, coiled in a corner, with head erect,
shining eyes, and hissing jaws, ready to dart at him. Instinctively
he seized his gun and pointed it at the reptile,
when suddenly his arm was struck up, the torch was
extinguished, and the voice of the old chief said, <q>Don't
fire! don't fire! I beg of you. In killing the serpent, it is
me that you would kill. Fear nothing. The serpent is my
<foreign rend='italic'>elangela</foreign>.</q> So saying he flung himself on his knees beside
the reptile, put his arms about it, and clasped it to his breast.
The serpent received his caresses quietly, manifesting neither
anger nor fear, and the chief carried it off and laid it down
beside him in another hut, exhorting the missionary to have
no fear and never to speak of the subject.<note place='foot'>Father H. Trilles, <q>Chez les
Fangs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxx.
(1898) p. 322; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Le Totémisme
chez les Fâṅ</hi> (Münster i. W. 1912),
pp. 473 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> His curiosity
being excited by this adventure, the missionary, Father
Trilles, pursued his enquiries and ascertained that among
the Fans of the Gaboon every wizard is believed at initiation
to unite his life with that of some particular wild animal
by a rite of blood-brotherhood; he draws blood from the ear
of the animal and from his own arm, and inoculates the
animal with his own blood, and himself with the blood of the
beast. Henceforth such an intimate union is established
between the two that the death of the one entails the death
of the other. The alliance is thought to bring to the wizard
or sorcerer a great accession of power, which he can turn to
his advantage in various ways. In the first place, like the
warlock in the fairy tales who has deposited his life outside
of himself in some safe place, the Fan wizard now deems
himself invulnerable. Moreover, the animal with which he
has exchanged blood has become his familiar, and will obey
any orders he may choose to give it; so he makes use of it
to injure and kill his enemies. For that reason the creature
with whom he establishes the relation of blood-brotherhood
is never a tame or domestic animal, but always a ferocious
and dangerous wild beast, such as a leopard, a black serpent,
a crocodile, a hippopotamus, a wild boar, or a vulture. Of
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
all these creatures the leopard is by far the commonest
familiar of Fan wizards, and next to it comes the black
serpent; the vulture is the rarest. Witches as well as wizards
have their familiars; but the animals with which the lives of
women are thus bound up generally differ from those to
which men commit their external souls. A witch never has a
panther for her familiar, but often a venomous species of
serpent, sometimes a horned viper, sometimes a black serpent,
sometimes a green one that lives in banana-trees; or it may
be a vulture, an owl, or other bird of night. In every case
the beast or bird with which the witch or wizard has contracted
this mystic alliance is an individual, never a species;
and when the individual animal dies the alliance is naturally
at an end, since the death of the animal is supposed to entail
the death of the man.<note place='foot'>Father H. Trilles, <hi rend='italic'>Le Totémisme
chez les Fâṅ</hi> (Münster i. W. 1912),
pp. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 438 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 484-489. The
description of the rite of blood-brotherhood
contracted with the animal
is quoted by Father Trilles (pp. 486
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) from a work by Mgr. Buléon, <hi rend='italic'>Sous
le ciel d'Afrique, Récits d'un Missionnaire</hi>,
pp. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Father Trilles's own
observations and enquiries confirm the
account given by Mgr. Buléon. But
the story of an alliance contracted
between a man or woman and a
ferocious wild beast and cemented by
the blood of the high contracting parties
is no doubt a mere fable devised by
wizards and witches in order to increase
their reputation by imposing on the
credulity of the simple.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief of
the natives
of the Cross
River that
they stand
in a vital
relation to
certain wild
animals, so
that when
the animal
dies the
man dies
also.</note>
Similar beliefs are held by the natives of the Cross River
valley within the German provinces of the Cameroons.
Groups of people, generally the inhabitants of a village, have
chosen various animals, with which they believe themselves
to stand on a footing of intimate friendship or relationship.
Amongst such animals are hippopotamuses, elephants,
leopards, crocodiles, gorillas, fish, and serpents, all of them
creatures which are either very strong or can easily hide themselves
in the water or a thicket. This power of concealing
themselves is said to be an indispensable condition of the
choice of animal familiars, since the animal friend or helper is
expected to injure his owner's enemy by stealth; for example,
if he is a hippopotamus, he will bob up suddenly out of the
water and capsize the enemy's canoe. Between the animals
and their human friends or kinsfolk such a sympathetic
relation is supposed to exist that the moment the animal
dies the man dies also, and similarly the instant the man
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
perishes so does the beast. From this it follows that the
animal kinsfolk may never be shot at or molested for fear of
injuring or killing the persons whose lives are knit up with
the lives of the brutes. This does not, however, prevent the
people of a village, who have elephants for their animal
friends, from hunting elephants. For they do not respect
the whole species but merely certain individuals of it, which
stand in an intimate relation to certain individual men and
women; and they imagine that they can always distinguish
these brother elephants from the common herd of elephants
which are mere elephants and nothing more. The recognition
indeed is said to be mutual. When a hunter, who has
an elephant for his friend, meets a human elephant, as we
may call it, the noble animal lifts up a paw and holds it
before his face, as much as to say, <q>Don't shoot.</q> Were the
hunter so inhuman as to fire on and wound such an elephant,
the person whose life was bound up with the elephant would
fall ill.<note place='foot'>Alfred Mansfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Urwald-Dokumente,
vier Jahre unter den Crossflussnegern
Kameruns</hi> (Berlin, 1908), pp.
220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
belief of
the Balong
in the
Cameroons.</note>
The Balong of the Cameroons think that every man has
several souls, of which one is in his body and another in an
animal, such as an elephant, a wild pig, a leopard, and so
forth. When a man comes home, feeling ill, and says, <q>I
shall soon die,</q> and dies accordingly, the people aver that one
of his souls has been killed in a wild pig or a leopard, and that
the death of the external soul has caused the death of the
soul in his body. Hence the corpse is cut open, and a
diviner determines, from an inspection of the inwards,
whether the popular surmise is correct or not.<note place='foot'>J. Keller (missionary), <q>Ueber
das Land und Volk der Balong,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsches Kolonialblatt</hi>, 1 Oktober
1895, p. 484; H. Seidel, <q>Ethnographisches
aus Nordost Kamerun,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxix. (1896) p. 277.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief of
the Ibos in
external
human
souls which
are lodged
in animals.</note>
A similar belief in the external souls of living people is
entertained by the Ibos, an important tribe of the Niger
delta, who inhabit a country west of the Cross River. They
think that a man's spirit can quit his body for a time during
life and take up its abode in an animal. This is called <foreign rend='italic'>ishi
anu</foreign>, <q>to turn animal.</q> A man who wishes to acquire this
power procures a certain drug from a wise man and mixes
it with his food. After that his soul goes out and enters
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
into the animal. If it should happen that the animal is
killed while the man's soul is lodged in it, the man dies;
and if the animal be wounded, the man's body will presently
be covered with boils. This belief instigates to many deeds
of darkness; for a sly rogue will sometimes surreptitiously
administer the magical drug to his enemy in his food, and
having thus smuggled the other's soul into an animal will
destroy the creature, and with it the man whose soul is
lodged in it.<note place='foot'>John Parkinson, <q>Note on the
Asaba People (Ibos) of the Niger,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxvi. (1906) pp. 314 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A like belief is reported to prevail among the
tribes of the Obubura Hill district on the Cross River in
Southern Nigeria. Once when Mr. Partridge's canoe-men
wished to catch fish near a town of the Assiga tribe, the
people objected, saying, <q>Our souls live in those fish, and if
you kill them we shall die.</q><note place='foot'>Charles Partridge, <hi rend='italic'>Cross River
Natives</hi> (London, 1905), pp. 225 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief of
the negroes
of Calabar
that every
person has
an external
or bush
soul lodged
in a wild
beast.</note>
The negroes of Calabar, at the mouth of the Niger,
believe that every person has four souls, one of which always
lives outside of his or her body in the form of a wild beast
in the forest. This external soul, or bush soul, as Miss
Kingsley calls it, may be almost any animal, for example, a
leopard, a fish, or a tortoise; but it is never a domestic
animal and never a plant. Unless he is gifted with second
sight, a man cannot see his own bush soul, but a diviner will
often tell him what sort of creature his bush soul is, and after
that the man will be careful not to kill any animal of that
species, and will strongly object to any one else doing so.
A man and his sons have usually the same sort of animals
for their bush souls, and so with a mother and her daughters.
But sometimes all the children of a family take after the
bush soul of their father; for example, if his external soul
is a leopard, all his sons and daughters will have leopards
for their external souls. And on the other hand, sometimes
they all take after their mother; for instance, if her external
soul is a tortoise, all the external souls of her sons and
daughters will be tortoises too. So intimately bound up is
the life of the man with that of the animal which he regards
as his external or bush soul, that the death or injury of the
animal necessarily entails the death or injury of the man.
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
And, conversely, when the man dies, his bush soul can no
longer find a place of rest, but goes mad and rushes into the
fire or charges people and is knocked on the head, and that
is an end of it. When a person is sick, the diviner will
sometimes tell him that his bush soul is angry at being
neglected; thereupon the patient will make an offering to
the offended spirit and deposit it in a tiny hut in the forest
at the spot where the animal, which is his external soul,
was last seen. If the bush soul is appeased, the patient
recovers; but if it is not, he dies. Yet the foolish bush
soul does not understand that in injuring the man it injures
itself, and that it cannot long survive his decease.<note place='foot'>Miss Mary H. Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in West Africa</hi> (London, 1897), pp.
459-461. The lamented authoress was
kind enough to give me in conversation
(1st June 1897) some details which
do not appear in her book; among
these are the statements, which I have
embodied in the text, that the bush
soul is never a domestic animal, and
that when a man knows what kind of
creature his bush soul is, he will not kill
an animal of that species and will
strongly object to any one else doing
so. Miss Kingsley was not able to
say whether persons who have the same
sort of bush soul are allowed or forbidden
to marry each other.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Further
particulars
as to the
Calabar
belief in
bush souls.</note>
Such is the account which Miss Kingsley gives of the
bush souls of the Calabar negroes. Some fresh particulars
are furnished by Mr. Richard Henshaw, Agent for Native
Affairs at Calabar. He tells us that a man may only marry
a woman who has the same sort of bush soul as himself;
for example, if his bush soul is a leopard, his wife also must
have a leopard for her bush soul. Further, we learn from
Mr. Henshaw that a person's bush soul need not be that
either of his father or of his mother. For example, a child
with a hippopotamus for his bush soul may be born into a
family, all the members of which have wild pigs for their
bush souls; this happens when the child is a reincarnation
of a man whose external soul was a hippopotamus. In such
a case, if the parents object to the intrusion of an alien soul,
they may call in a medicine-man to check its growth and
finally abolish it altogether, after which they will give the
child their own bush soul. Or they may leave the matter
over till the child comes of age, when he will choose a bush
soul for himself with the help of a medicine-man, who will also
select the piece of bush or water in which the chosen animal
lives. When a man dies, then the animal which contains his
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
external soul <q>becomes insensible and quite unconscious of
the approach of danger. Thus a hunter can capture or
kill him with perfect ease.</q> Sacrifices are often offered to
prevent other people from killing the animal in which a
man's bush soul resides. The tribes of Calabar which hold
these beliefs as to the bush soul are the Efik and Ekoi.<note place='foot'>John Parkinson, <q>Notes on the
Efik Belief in <q>Bush-soul,</q></q> <hi rend='italic'>Man</hi>, vi.
(1906) pp. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, No. 80. Mr.
Henshaw is a member of the highest
grade of the secret society of Egbo.</note>
The belief of the Calabar negroes in the external soul has
been described as follows by a missionary: <q><foreign rend='italic'>Ukpong</foreign> is the
native word we have taken to translate our word <emph>soul</emph>. It
primarily signifies the shadow of a person. It also signifies
that which dwells within a man on which his life depends,
but which may detach itself from the body, and visiting
places and persons here and there, again return to its abode
in the man.... Besides all this, the word is used to
designate an animal possessed of an <foreign rend='italic'>ukpong</foreign>, so connected
with a person's <foreign rend='italic'>ukpong</foreign>, that they mutually act upon each
other. When the leopard, or crocodile, or whatever animal
may be a man's <foreign rend='italic'>ukpong</foreign>, gets sick or dies, the like thing
happens to him. Many individuals, it is believed, have the
power of changing themselves into the animals which are
their <foreign rend='italic'>ukpong</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Hugh Goldie, <hi rend='italic'>Calabar and its
Mission</hi>, New Edition (Edinburgh and
London, 1901), pp. 51 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare
Major A. G. Leonard, <hi rend='italic'>The Lower Niger
and its Tribes</hi> (London, 1906), p. 217:
<q>When Efik or waterside Ibo see a
dead fish floating in the water of the
kind called <foreign rend='italic'>Edidim</foreign> by the former and
<foreign rend='italic'>Elili</foreign> by the latter&mdash;a variety of the
electric species&mdash;they believe it to be a
bad omen, generally signifying that
some one belonging to the house will
die, the man who first sees it becoming
the victim according to Ibo belief. The
only reason that is assigned for this
lugubrious forecast is the fact that one
of the souls of the departed is in the dead
fish&mdash;that, in fact, the relationship or
affinity existing between the soul
essence that had animated the fish
and that of one of the members of the
household was so intimate that the
death of the one was bound to effect
the death of the other.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief of
the Ekoi
of Southern
Nigeria in
external
souls
lodged in
animals. Case of a
chief whose
external
soul was in
a buffalo.</note>
Among the Ekoi of the Oban district, in Southern
Nigeria, it is usual to hear a person say of another that he
or she <q>possesses</q> such and such an animal, meaning that
the person has the power to assume the shape of that particular
creature. It is their belief that by constant practice
and by virtue of certain hereditary secrets a man can quit
his human body and put on that of a wild beast. They say
that in addition to the soul which animates his human body
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
everybody has a bush soul which at times he can send forth
to animate the body of the creature which he <q>possesses.</q>
When he wishes his bush soul to go out on its rambles, he
drinks a magic potion, the secret of which has been handed
down from time immemorial, and some of which is always
kept ready for use in an ancient earthen pot set apart for the
purpose. No sooner has he drunk the mystic draught than
his bush soul escapes from him and floats away invisible
through the town into the forest. There it begins to swell
and, safe in the shadow of the trees, takes on the shape of
the man's animal double, it may be an elephant, a leopard, a
buffalo, a wild boar, or a crocodile. Naturally the potion
differs according to the kind of animal into which a man is
temporarily converted. It would be absurd, for example, to
expect that the dose which turns you into an elephant should
also be able to turn you into a crocodile; the thing is manifestly
impossible. A great advantage of these temporary
conversions of a man into a beast is that it enables the
convert in his animal shape to pay out his enemy without
being suspected. If, for example, you have a grudge at a
man who is a well-to-do farmer, all that you have to do is to
turn yourself by night into a buffalo, an elephant, or a wild
boar, and then, bursting into his fields, stamp about in them
till you have laid the standing crops level with the ground.
That is why in the neighbourhood of large well-tilled farms,
people prefer to keep their bush souls in buffaloes, elephants,
and wild boars, because these animals are the most convenient
means of destroying a neighbour's crops. Whereas where
the farms are small and ill-kept, as they are round about
Oban, it is hardly worth a man's while to take the trouble
of turning into a buffalo or an elephant for the paltry satisfaction
of rooting up a few miserable yams or such like trash.
So the Oban people keep their bush souls in leopards and
crocodiles, which, though of little use for the purpose of
destroying a neighbour's crops, are excellent for the purpose
of killing the man himself first and eating him afterwards.
But the power of turning into an animal has this serious disadvantage
that it lays you open to the chance of being
wounded or even slain in your animal skin before you have
time to put it off and scramble back into your human integument.
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
A remarkable case of this sort happened only a few
miles from Oban not long ago. To understand it you must
know that the chiefs of the Ododop tribe, who live about ten
miles from Oban, keep their bush souls, whenever they are
out on a ramble, in the shape of buffaloes. Well, one day the
District Commissioner at Oban saw a buffalo come down to
drink at a stream which runs through his garden. He shot
at the beast and hit it, and it ran away badly wounded. At
the very same moment the head chief of the Ododop tribe,
ten miles away, clapped his hand to his side and said,
<q>They have killed me at Oban.</q> Death was not instantaneous,
for the buffalo lingered in pain for a couple of days
in the forest, but an hour or two before its dead body was discovered
by the trackers the chief expired. Just before he died,
with touching solicitude he sent a message warning all
people who kept their external souls in buffaloes to profit by
his sad fate and beware of going near Oban, which was not
a safe place for them. Naturally, when a man keeps his
external soul from time to time in a beast, say in a wild
cow, he is not so foolish as to shoot an animal of that
particular sort, for in so doing he might perhaps be killing
himself. But he may kill animals in which other people
keep their external souls. For example, a wild cow man
may freely shoot an antelope or a wild boar; but should he
do so and then have reason to suspect that the dead beast is
the animal double of somebody with whom he is on friendly
terms, he must perform certain ceremonies over the carcase
and then hurry home, running at the top of his speed, to
administer a particular medicine to the man whom he has
unintentionally injured. In this way he may possibly be in
time to save the life of his friend from the effects of the
deplorable accident.<note place='foot'>P. Amaury Talbot, <hi rend='italic'>In the Shadow
of the Bush</hi> (London, 1912), pp. 80-87.
The Ekoi name for a man who has the
power of sending out his spirit into
the form of some animal is <foreign rend='italic'>efumi</foreign> (<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
p. 71 note). A certain chief named
Agbashan, a great elephant hunter, is
believed to have the power of transforming
himself into an elephant; and
<q>a man of considerable intelligence,
educated in England, the brother of a
member of the Legislative Council for
one of the West African Colonies,
offered to take oath that he had seen
Agbashan not only in his elephant
form, but while actually undergoing the
metamorphosis</q> (<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). In
this case, therefore, the man seems to
have felt no scruples at hunting the
animals in one of which his own bush
soul might be lodged.</note>
</p>

<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief
of other
tribes of
Nigeria in
external
souls
lodged in
animals.</note>
Near Eket in North Calabar there is a sacred lake, the fish
of which are carefully preserved because the people believe that
their own souls are lodged in the fish, and that with every
fish killed a human life would be simultaneously extinguished.<note place='foot'>Letter of Mr. P. Amaury Talbot
to me, dated Eket, North Calabar,
Southern Nigeria, April 3d, 1913.</note>
In the Calabar River not very many years ago there used
to be a huge old crocodile, popularly supposed to contain the
external soul of a chief who resided in the flesh at Duke
Town. Sporting vice-consuls used from time to time to
hunt the animal, and once a peculiarly energetic officer contrived
to hit it. Forthwith the chief was laid up with a
wound in his leg. He gave out that a dog had bitten him,
but no doubt the wise shook their heads and refused to be
put off with so flimsy a pretext.<note place='foot'>Miss Mary H. Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in West Africa</hi> (London, 1897), pp.
538 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, among several
tribes on the banks of the Niger between Lokoja and the
delta there prevails <q>a belief in the possibility of a man
possessing an <hi rend='italic'>alter ego</hi> in the form of some animal such as a
crocodile or a hippopotamus. It is believed that such a
person's life is bound up with that of the animal to such an
extent that, whatever affects the one produces a corresponding
impression upon the other, and that if one dies the other
must speedily do so too. It happened not very long ago that
an Englishman shot a hippopotamus close to a native village;
the friends of a woman who died the same night in the
village demanded and eventually obtained five pounds as
compensation for the murder of the woman.</q><note place='foot'>C. H. Robinson, <hi rend='italic'>Hausaland</hi> (London,
1896), pp. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the
Montols of Northern Nigeria, <q>in many of the compounds
there will be found a species of snake, of a non-poisonous
sort, which, when full grown, attains a length of about five
feet and a girth of eight or nine inches. These snakes live
in and about the compound. They are not specially fed by
the people of the place, nor are places provided for them to
nest in. They live generally in the roofs of the small
granaries and huts that make up the compound. They feed
upon small mammals, and no doubt serve a useful purpose
in destroying vermin which might otherwise eat the stored
grain. They are not kept for the purpose of destroying
vermin, however. The Montols believe that at the birth of
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
every individual of their race, male and female, one of these
snakes, of the same sex, is also born. If the snake be killed,
his human partner in life dies also and at the same time. If
the wife of a compound-owner gives birth to a son, shortly
after the interesting event, the snake of the establishment
will be seen with a young one of corresponding sex. From
the moment of birth, these two, the snake and the man,
share a life of common duration, and the measure of the one
is the measure of the other. Hence every care is taken to
protect these animals from injury, and no Montol would in
any circumstances think of injuring or killing one. It is said
that a snake of this kind never attempts any injury to a man.
There is only one type of snake thus regarded.</q><note place='foot'>J. F. J. Fitzpatrick (Assistant
Resident, Northern Nigeria), <q>Some
Notes on the Kwolla District and its
Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the African Society</hi>,
No. 37, October, 1910, p. 30.</note> Among
the Angass, of the Kanna District in Northern Nigeria, <q>when
a man is born, he is endowed with two distinct entities, life
and a <foreign rend='italic'>kurua</foreign> (Arabic <foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>rin</foreign>).... When the <foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>rin</foreign> enters a man,
its counterpart enters some beast or snake at the same
time, and if either dies, so also does the body containing the
counterpart. This, however, in no wise prevents a man
from killing any game, etc., he may see, though he knows
full well that he is causing thereby the death of some man
or woman. When a man dies, his life and <foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>rin</foreign> both leave
him, though the latter is asserted sometimes to linger near
the place of death for a day or two.</q><note place='foot'>Extract from a Report by Captain
Foulkes to the British Colonial Office.
My thanks are due to Mr. N. W.
Thomas for sending me the extract and
to the authorities of the Colonial Office
for their permission to publish it.</note> Again, at the town of
Paha, in the northern territory of the Gold Coast, there are
pools inhabited by crocodiles which are worshipped by the
people. The natives believe that for every death or birth in
the town a similar event takes place among the crocodiles.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Daily Graphic</hi>, Tuesday,
October 7th, 1902, p. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The conception
of
an external
soul
lodged in
an animal
appears to
be absent
in South
Africa.</note>
In South Africa the conception of an external soul
deposited in an animal, which is so common in West Africa,
appears to be almost unknown; at least I have met with no
clear traces of it in literature. The Bechuanas, indeed, commonly
believe that if a man wounds a crocodile, the man
will be ill as long as the crocodile is ill of its wound, and
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
that if the crocodile dies, the man dies too. This belief is
not, apparently, confined to the Bechuana clan which has
the crocodile for its totem, but is shared by all the other
clans; all of them certainly hold the crocodile in respect.<note place='foot'>Rev. W. C. Willoughby, <q>Notes
on the Totemism of the Becwana,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxv. (1905) p. 300. The writer adds
that he found a similar belief as to
the sympathetic relation between a
wounded crocodile and the man who
wounded it very general among the
Wanyamwezi, who, in 1882, were
living under Mirambo about two
hundred miles south of Lake Victoria
Nyanza and a hundred miles east of
Lake Tanganyika.</note> It
does not appear whether the sympathetic relation between a
man and a crocodile is supposed by the Bechuanas to be
lifelong, or only to arise at the moment when the man
wounds the animal; in the latter case the shedding of the
crocodile's blood might perhaps be thought to establish a
relationship of affinity or sympathy between the two. The
Zulus believe that every man is attended by an ancestral
spirit (<foreign rend='italic'>ihlozi</foreign>, or rather <foreign rend='italic'>idhlozi</foreign>) in the form of a serpent,
<q>which specially guards and helps him, lives with him, wakes
with him, sleeps and travels with him, but always under
ground. If it ever makes its appearance, great is the joy,
and the man must seek to discover the meaning of its
appearance. He who has no <foreign rend='italic'>ihlozi</foreign> must die. Therefore if
any one kills an <foreign rend='italic'>ihlozi</foreign> serpent, the man whose <foreign rend='italic'>ihlozi</foreign> it was
dies, but the serpent comes to life again.</q><note place='foot'><p>F. Speckmann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Hermannsburger
Mission in Africa</hi> (Hermannsburg,
1876) p. 167. Compare David
Leslie, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Zulus and Amatongas</hi>,
Second Edition (Edinburgh, 1875)
pp. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <q>The Kaffirs believe that
after death their spirits turn into a
snake, which they call <foreign rend='italic'>Ehlose</foreign>, and that
every living man has two of these
familiar spirits&mdash;a good and a bad.
When everything they undertake goes
wrong with them, such as hunting,
cattle-breeding, etc., they say they
know that it is their enemies who are
annoying them, and that they are only
to be appeased by sacrificing an animal;
but when everything prospers, they
ascribe it to their good <foreign rend='italic'>Ehlose</foreign> being in
the ascendant</q>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 148:
<q>When in battle two men are fighting,
their snakes (<foreign rend='italic'>Mahloze</foreign>) are poetically
said to be twisting and biting each
other overhead. One <q>softens</q> and
goes down, and the man, whose attendant
it is, goes down with it. Everything
is ascribed to <foreign rend='italic'>Ehlose</foreign>. If he
fails in anything, his <foreign rend='italic'>Ehlose</foreign> is bad; if
successful, it is good.... It is this
thing which is the inducing cause of
everything. In fact, nothing in Zulu
is admitted to arise from natural
causes; everything is ascribed to
witchcraft or the <foreign rend='italic'>Ehlose</foreign>.</q>
</p>
<p>
It is not all serpents that are <foreign rend='italic'>amadhlozi</foreign>
(plural of <foreign rend='italic'>idhlozi</foreign>), that is, are the
transformed spirits of the dead. Serpents
which are dead men may easily
be distinguished from common snakes,
for they frequent huts; they do not
eat mice, and they are not afraid of
people. If a man in his life had a
scar, his serpent after his death will
also have a scar; if he had only one
eye, his serpent will have only one
eye; if he was lame, his serpent
will be lame too. That is how you
can recognise So-and-So in his serpent
form. Chiefs do not turn into the
same kind of snakes as ordinary people.
For common folk become harmless
snakes with green and white bellies
and very small heads; but kings
become boa-constrictors or the large
and deadly black <foreign rend='italic'>mamba</foreign>. See Rev.
Henry Callaway, M.D., <hi rend='italic'>The Religions
System of the Amazulu</hi>, Part ii.
(Capetown, London, etc., 1869) pp.
134 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 140, 196-202, 205, 208-211,
231. <q>The <foreign rend='italic'>Ehlose</foreign> of Chaka and
other dead kings is the Boa-constrictor,
or the large and deadly black Mamba,
whichever the doctors decide. That
of dead Queens is the tree Iguana</q>
(David Leslie, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 213). Compare
Rev. Joseph Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs
of Natal and the Zulu Country</hi> (London,
1857), pp. 161 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. R.
Gordon, <q>Words about Spirits,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>South African</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, ii.
(Cape Town, 1880) pp. 101-103; W.
Grant, <q>Magato and his Tribe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxv. (1905) p. 270. A word which is
sometimes confounded with <foreign rend='italic'>idhlozi</foreign> is
<foreign rend='italic'>itongo</foreign> (plural <foreign rend='italic'>amatongo</foreign>); but the natives
themselves when closely questioned
distinguish between the two. See
Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Childhood, a
Study of Kafir Children</hi> (London,
1906), pp. 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 281-286. The
notion that the spirits of the dead
appear in the form of serpents is widespread
in Africa. See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis,
Osiris</hi>, Second Edition, pp. 73 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
Dr. F. B. Jevons has suggested that
the Roman <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>genius</foreign>, the guardian-spirit
which accompanied a man from birth
to death (Censorinus, <hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, 3)
and was commonly represented in the
form of a snake, may have been an
external soul. See F. B. Jevons,
<hi rend='italic'>Plutarch's Romane Questions</hi> (London,
1892) pp. xlvii. <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Introduction
to the History of Religion</hi> (London,
1896), pp. 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. Preller,
<hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Berlin, 1881-1883),
ii. 195 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; G. Wissowa,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion und Kultus der Römer</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Munich, 1912), pp. 176 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></p></note> But the conception
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
of a dead ancestor incarnate in a snake, on which the
welfare or existence of one of his living descendants depends,
is rather that of a guardian spirit than of an external
soul.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The conception
of
an external
soul
lodged in
an animal
occurs
among the
Indians of
Central
America,
some of
whom call
such a soul
a <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign>.</note>
Amongst the Zapotecs of Central America, when a
woman was about to be confined, her relations assembled in
the hut, and began to draw on the floor figures of different
animals, rubbing each one out as soon as it was completed.
This went on till the moment of birth, and the figure that
then remained sketched upon the ground was called the
child's <foreign rend='italic'>tona</foreign> or second self. <q>When the child grew old
enough, he procured the animal that represented him and
took care of it, as it was believed that health and existence
were bound up with that of the animal's, in fact that the
death of both would occur simultaneously,</q> or rather that
when the animal died the man would die too.<note place='foot'>H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>The Native Races
of the Pacific Coast</hi> (London, 1875-1876),
i. 661. The words quoted
by Bancroft (p. 662, note), <q><foreign lang='es' rend='italic'>Consérvase
entre ellos la creencia de que
su vida está unida à la de un animal,
y que es forzoso que mueran ellos
cuando éste muere</foreign>,</q> are not quite accurately
represented by the statement
of Bancroft in the text. Elsewhere
(vol. ii. p. 277) the same writer calls
the <q>second self</q> of the Zapotecs a
<q><foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign>, or tutelary genius,</q> adding
that the fate of the child was supposed
to be so intimately bound up with the
fortune of the animal that the death
of the one involved the death of the
other. Compare Daniel G. Brinton,
<q>Nagualism, a Study in American
Folk-lore and History,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of
the American Philosophical Society
held at Philadelphia</hi>, vol. xxxiii. No.
144 (Philadelphia, January, 1894), pp.
11-73. According to Professor E.
Seler the word <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> is akin to the
Mexican <foreign rend='italic'>naualli</foreign>, <q>a witch or wizard,</q>
which is derived from a word meaning
<q>hidden</q> with reference to the power
attributed to sorcerers of transforming
themselves into animals. See E. Seler,
<q>Altmexikanische Studien, II.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Veröffentlichungen
aus dem Königlichen
Museum für Völkerkunde</hi>, vi. heft 2/4
(Berlin, 1899), pp. 52-57.</note> Among the
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
Indians of Guatemala and Honduras the <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>naual</foreign> is
<q>that animate or inanimate object, generally an animal,
which stands in a parallel relation to a particular man, so
that the weal and woe of the man depend on the fate of the
<foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>Otto Stoll, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ethnologie der
Indianerstämme von Guatemala</hi> (Leyden,
1889), p. 57.</note> According to an old writer, many Indians of
Guatemala <q>are deluded by the devil to believe that their
life dependeth upon the life of such and such a beast (which
they take unto them as their familiar spirit), and think that
when that beast dieth they must die; when he is chased,
their hearts pant; when he is faint, they are faint; nay, it
happeneth that by the devil's delusion they appear in the
shape of that beast (which commonly by their choice is a
buck, or doe, a lion, or tigre, or dog, or eagle) and in that
shape have been shot at and wounded.</q><note place='foot'>Thomas Gage, <hi rend='italic'>A New Survey of
the West Indies</hi>, Third Edition (London,
1677), p. 334. The same writer
relates how a certain Indian named
Gonzalez was reported to have the
power of turning himself into a lion or
rather a puma. Once when a Spaniard
had shot a puma in the nose, Gonzalez
was found with a bruised face and
accused the Spaniard of having shot
him. Another Indian chief named
Gomez was said to have transformed
himself into a puma, and in that shape
to have fought a terrific battle with a
rival chief named Lopez, who had
changed himself into a jaguar. See
Gage, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 383-389.</note> Herrera's account
of the way in which the Indians of Honduras acquired their
<foreign rend='italic'>naguals</foreign>, runs thus: <q>The devil deluded them, appearing in
the shape of a lion or a tiger, or a coyte, a beast like a
wolf, or in the shape of an alligator, a snake, or a bird, that
province abounding in creatures of prey, which they called
<foreign rend='italic'>naguales</foreign>, signifying keepers or guardians, and when the bird
died the Indian that was in league with him died also,
which often happened and was looked upon as infallible.
The manner of contracting this alliance was thus. The
Indian repaired to the river, wood, hill, or most obscure
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
place, where he called upon the devils by such names as he
thought fit, talked to the rivers, rocks, or woods, said he
went to weep that he might have the same his predecessors
had, carrying a cock or a dog to sacrifice. In that melancholy
fit he fell asleep, and either in a dream or waking
saw some one of the aforesaid birds or other creatures,
whom he entreated to grant him profit in salt, cacao, or any
other commodity, drawing blood from his own tongue, ears,
and other parts of his body, making his contract at the
same time with the said creature, the which either in a
dream or waking told him, <q>Such a day you shall go abroad
asporting, and I will be the first bird or other animal you
shall meet, and will be your <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> and companion at all
times.</q> Whereupon such friendship was contracted between
them, that when one of them died the other did not survive,
and they fancied that he who had no <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> could not be
rich.</q><note place='foot'>Antonio de Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>General History
of the Vast Continent and Islands
of America</hi>, translated by Capt. John
Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iv.
138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The Spanish original of Herrera's
history, a work based on excellent
authorities, was first published
at Madrid in 1601-1615. The Indians
of Santa Catalina Istlavacan still receive
at birth the name of some animal,
which is commonly regarded as their
guardian spirit for the rest of their life.
The name is bestowed by the heathen
priest, who usually hears of a birth
in the village sooner than his Catholic
colleague. See K. Scherzer, <q>Die
Indianer von Santa Catalina Istlávacana
(Frauenfuss), ein Beitrag zur
Culturgeschichte der Urbewohner Central-Amerikas,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Sitzungsberichte der
philos. histor. Classe der kais. Akademie
der Wissenschaften</hi> (Vienna), xviii.
(1856) p. 235.</note> The Indians were persuaded that the death of their
<foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> would entail their own. Legend affirms that in the
first battles with the Spaniards on the plateau of Quetzaltenango
the <foreign rend='italic'>naguals</foreign> of the Indian chiefs fought in the form
of serpents. The <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> of the highest chief was especially
conspicuous, because it had the form of a great bird, resplendent
in green plumage. The Spanish general Pedro
de Alvarado killed the bird with his lance, and at the same
moment the Indian chief fell dead to the ground.<note place='foot'>Otto Stoll, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ethnologie der
Indianerstämme von Guatemala</hi> (Leyden,
1889), pp. 57 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Suggestion
und Hypnotism</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Leipsic, 1904), p.
170.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In some
tribes of
South-Eastern
Australia
the lives of
the two
sexes are
thought to
be bound
up with the
lives of two
different
kinds of
animals,
as bats
and owls.</note>
In many tribes of South-Eastern Australia each sex used
to regard a particular species of animals in the same way that a
Central American Indian regarded his <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign>, but with this
difference, that whereas the Indian apparently knew the individual
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
animal with which his life was bound up, the Australians
only knew that each of their lives was bound up with some
one animal of the species, but they could not say with which.
The result naturally was that every man spared and protected
all the animals of the species with which the lives of the men
were bound up; and every woman spared and protected all the
animals of the species with which the lives of the women were
bound up; because no one knew but that the death of any
animal of the respective species might entail his or her own;
just as the killing of the green bird was immediately
followed by the death of the Indian chief, and the killing of
the parrot by the death of Punchkin in the fairy tale.
Thus, for example, the Wotjobaluk tribe of South-Eastern
Australia <q>held that <q>the life of Ngŭnŭngŭnŭt (the Bat) is
the life of a man, and the life of Yártatgŭrk (the Nightjar)
is the life of a woman,</q> and that when either of these
creatures is killed the life of some man or of some woman
is shortened. In such a case every man or every woman
in the camp feared that he or she might be the victim, and
from this cause great fights arose in this tribe. I learn that
in these fights, men on one side and women on the other,
it was not at all certain which would be victorious, for
at times the women gave the men a severe drubbing with
their yamsticks, while often women were injured or killed
by spears.</q> The Wotjobaluk said that the bat was the
man's <q>brother</q> and that the nightjar was his <q>wife.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>Further Notes
on the Australian Class Systems,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xviii. (1889) pp. 57 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</hi>
(London, 1904), pp. 148, 150. It is
very remarkable that among the Kurnai
these fights had a special connexion
with marriage. When young men were
backward of taking wives, the women
used to go out into the forest and kill
an emu-wren, which was the men's
<q>brother</q>; then returning to the
camp they shewed the dead bird to the
men. The result was a fight between
the young men and the young women,
in which, however, lads who were not
yet marriageable might not take part.
Next day the marriageable young men
went out and killed a superb warbler,
which was the women's <q>sister,</q> and
this led to a worse fight than before.
Some days afterwards, when the wounds
and bruises were healed, one of the
marriageable young men met one of
the marriageable young women, and
said, <q>Superb warbler!</q> She answered,
<q>Emu-wren! What does the
emu-wren eat?</q> To which the young
man answered, <q>He eats so-and-so,</q>
naming kangaroo, opossum, emu, or
some other game. Then they laughed,
and she ran off with him without telling
any one. See L. Fison and A. W.
Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi and Kurnai</hi> (Melbourne,
Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane,
1880), pp. 201 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. W.
Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East
Australia</hi>, pp. 149, 273 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Perhaps
this killing of the sex-totem before
marriage may be related to the pretence
of killing young men and bringing
them to life again at puberty. See
below, pp. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
The particular species of animals with which the lives of
the sexes were believed to be respectively bound up varied
somewhat from tribe to tribe. Thus whereas among the
Wotjobaluk the bat was the animal of the men, at Gunbower
Creek on the Lower Murray the bat seems to have been
the animal of the women, for the natives would not kill it
for the reason that <q>if it was killed, one of their lubras
[women] would be sure to die in consequence.</q><note place='foot'>Gerard Krefft, <q>Manners and
Customs of the Aborigines of the Lower
Murray and Darling,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of
the Philosophical Society of New South
Wales</hi>, 1862-65, pp. 359 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the
Kurnai tribe of Gippsland the emu-wren (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Stipiturus malachurus</foreign>)
was the <q>man's brother</q> and the superb warbler
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Malurus cyaneus</foreign>) was the <q>woman's sister</q>; at the initiation
of young men into the tribal mysteries the name of the
emu-wren was invoked over the novices for the purpose of
infusing manly virtue into them.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>Further Notes on
the Australian Class Systems,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xviii.
(1889) pp. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Yuin on the
south-eastern coast of Australia, the <q>woman's sister</q> was
the tree-creeper (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Climacteris scandens</foreign>), and the men had
both the bat and the emu-wren for their <q>brothers.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 57;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East
Australia</hi>, p. 150.</note> In
the Kulin nation each sex had a pair of <q>brothers</q> and
<q>sisters</q>; the men had the bat and the emu-wren for their
<q>brothers,</q> and the women had the superb warbler and the
small nightjar for their <q>sisters.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>On the Migrations
of the Kurnai Ancestors,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xv.
(1886) p. 416.</note> It is notable that in South-Eastern
Australia the animals thus associated with the lives of
men and women were generally flying creatures, either birds
or bats. However, in the Port Lincoln tribe of South Australia
the man's <q>brother</q> and the woman's <q>sister</q> seem to have
been identified with the male and female respectively of a
species of lizard; for we read that <q>a small kind of lizard,
the male of which is called <foreign rend='italic'>ibirri</foreign>, and the female <foreign rend='italic'>waka</foreign>, is
said to have divided the sexes in the human species; an
event that would appear not to be much approved of by the
natives, since either sex has a mortal hatred against the
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
opposite sex of these little animals, the men always destroying
the <foreign rend='italic'>waka</foreign> and the women the <foreign rend='italic'>ibirri</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>C. W. Schürmann, <q>The Aboriginal
Tribes of Port Lincoln,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Native
Tribes of South Australia</hi> (Adelaide,
1879), p. 241. Compare G. F. Angas,
<hi rend='italic'>Savage Life and Scenes in Australia
and New Zealand</hi> (London, 1847), i.
109.</note> But whatever
the particular sorts of creature with which the lives of men
and women were believed to be bound up, the belief itself
and the fights to which it gave rise are known to have
prevailed over a large part of South-Eastern Australia, and
probably they extended much farther.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>Further Notes on
the Australian Class Systems,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xviii.
(1889) p. 58. Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Native
Tribes of South-East Australia</hi> (London,
1904), pp. 148-151.</note> The belief was a very
serious one, and so consequently were the fights which sprang
from it. Thus among some tribes of Victoria <q>the common
bat belongs to the men, who protect it against injury, even
to the half-killing of their wives for its sake. The fern owl,
or large goatsucker, belongs to the women, and, although a
bird of evil omen, creating terror at night by its cry, it is
jealously protected by them. If a man kills one, they are
as much enraged as if it was one of their children, and will
strike him with their long poles.</q><note place='foot'>James Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>
(Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide,
1881), p. 52.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bats
regarded
as the
brothers of
men, and
owls as the
sisters of
women.</note>
The jealous protection thus afforded by Australian men
and women to bats and owls respectively (for bats and
owls seem to be the creatures usually allotted to the two
sexes)<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>, i.
47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> It is at least remarkable that
both the creatures thus assigned to the
two sexes should be nocturnal in their
habits. Perhaps the choice of such
creatures is connected with the belief
that the soul is absent from the body
in slumber. On this hypothesis bats
and owls would be regarded by these
savages as the wandering souls of
sleepers. Such a belief would fully
account for the reluctance of the natives
to kill them. The Kiowa Indians of
North America think that owls and
other night birds are animated by the
souls of the dead. See James Mooney,
<q>Calendar History of the Kiowa
Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Seventeenth Annual Report
of the Bureau of American Ethnology</hi>,
Part i. (Washington, 1898) p. 237.</note> is not based upon purely selfish considerations.
For each man believes that not only his own life but the
lives of his father, brothers, sons, and so on are bound up with
the lives of particular bats, and that therefore in protecting the
bat species he is protecting the lives of all his male relations
as well as his own. Similarly, each woman believes that the
lives of her mother, sisters, daughters, and so forth, equally
with her own, are bound up with the lives of particular owls,
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
and that in guarding the owl species she is guarding the lives
of all her female relations besides her own. Now, when
men's lives are thus supposed to be contained in certain
animals, it is obvious that the animals can hardly be distinguished
from the men, or the men from the animals. If
my brother John's life is in a bat, then, on the one hand, the
bat is my brother as well as John; and, on the other hand,
John is in a sense a bat, since his life is in a bat. Similarly,
if my sister Mary's life is in an owl, then the owl is my
sister and Mary is an owl. This is a natural enough conclusion,
and the Australians have not failed to draw it.
When the bat is the man's animal, it is called his brother;
and when the owl is the woman's animal, it is called her
sister. And conversely a man addresses a woman as an owl,
and she addresses him as a bat.<note place='foot'>A. L. P. Cameron, <q>Notes on
some Tribes of New South Wales,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xiv. (1885) p. 350 note 1; A. W.
Howitt, <q>On the Migrations of the
Kurnai Ancestors,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xv. (1886)
p. 416; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Further Notes on the
Australian Class Systems,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xviii.
(1889) p. 57.</note> So with the other animals
allotted to the sexes respectively in other tribes. For
example, among the Kurnai all emu-wrens were <q>brothers</q>
of the men, and all the men were emu-wrens; all superb
warblers were <q>sisters</q> of the women, and all the women
were superb warblers.<note place='foot'>L. Fison and A. W. Howitt,
<hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi and Kurnai</hi>, pp. 194, 201,
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 215; <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xv. 416, xviii. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. W.
Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East
Australia</hi> (London, 1904), pp. 148-151.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. A Suggested Theory of Totemism.'/>
<head>§ 4. A Suggested Theory of Totemism.<note place='foot'>The following suggestion as to the
origin of totemism was made in the
first edition of this book (published in
1890) and is here reprinted without
any substantial change. In the meantime
much additional evidence as to
the nature and prevalence of totemism
has come to light, and with the new
evidence my opinions, or rather conjectures,
as to the origin of the institution
have repeatedly changed. If I
here reprint my earliest conjecture, it
is partly because I still think it may
contain an element of truth, and partly
because it serves as a convenient peg
on which to hang a collection of facts
which are much more valuable than
any theories of mine. The reader who
desires to acquaint himself more fully
with the facts of totemism and with
the theories that have been broached
on the subject, will find them stated
at length in my <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>
(London, 1910). Here I will
only call attention to the Arunta
legend that the ancestors of the tribe
kept their spirits in certain sacred sticks
and stones (<foreign rend='italic'>churinga</foreign>), which bear a
close resemblance to the well-known
bull-roarers, and that when they went
out hunting they hung these sticks or
stones on certain sacred poles (<foreign rend='italic'>nurtunjas</foreign>)
which represented their totems. See
Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen,
<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of Central Australia</hi>
(London, 1899), pp. 137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 629.
This tradition appears to point to a
custom of transferring a man's soul or
spirit temporarily to his totem. Conversely
when an Arunta is sick he
scrapes his <foreign rend='italic'>churinga</foreign> and swallows the
scrapings, as if to restore to himself
the spiritual substance deposited in the
instrument. See Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 135 note 1.</note></head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sex totems
and clan
totems may
both be
based on
the notion
that men
and women
keep their
external
souls in
their
totems,
whether
these are
animals,
plants, or
what not.</note>
But when a savage names himself after an animal, calls
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
it his brother, and refuses to kill it, the animal is said to
be his totem. Accordingly in the tribes of South-Eastern
Australia which we have been considering the bat and the
owl, the emu-wren and the superb warbler, may properly be
described as totems of the sexes. But the assignation of a
totem to a sex is comparatively rare, and has hitherto been
discovered nowhere but in Australia. Far more commonly
the totem is appropriated not to a sex, but to a clan, and
is hereditary either in the male or female line. The relation
of an individual to the clan totem does not differ in kind
from his relation to the sex totem; he will not kill it, he
speaks of it as his brother, and he calls himself by its name.
Now if the relations are similar, the explanation which holds
good of the one ought equally to hold good of the other.
Therefore the reason why a clan revere a particular species
of animals or plants (for the clan totem may be a plant) and
call themselves after it, would seem to be a belief that the
life of each individual of the clan is bound up with some one
animal or plant of the species, and that his or her death
would be the consequence of killing that particular animal,
or destroying that particular plant. This explanation of
totemism squares very well with Sir George Grey's definition
of a totem or <foreign rend='italic'>kobong</foreign> in Western Australia. He says: <q>A
certain mysterious connection exists between a family and
its <foreign rend='italic'>kobong</foreign>, so that a member of the family will never kill an
animal of the species to which his <foreign rend='italic'>kobong</foreign> belongs, should he
find it asleep; indeed he always kills it reluctantly, and never
without affording it a chance to escape. This arises from
the family belief that some one individual of the species is
their nearest friend, to kill whom would be a great crime,
and to be carefully avoided. Similarly, a native who has
a vegetable for his <foreign rend='italic'>kobong</foreign> may not gather it under certain
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
circumstances, and at a particular period of the year.</q><note place='foot'>(Sir) George Grey, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of
Two Expeditions of Discovery in North-West
and Western Australia</hi> (London,
1841), ii. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here
it will be observed that though each man spares all the
animals or plants of the species, they are not all equally
precious to him; far from it, out of the whole species there
is only one which is specially dear to him; but as he does
not know which the dear one is, he is obliged to spare them
all from fear of injuring the one. Again, this explanation
of the clan totem harmonizes with the supposed effect of
killing one of the totem species. <q>One day one of the
blacks killed a crow. Three or four days afterwards a
Boortwa (crow) [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> a man of the Crow clan] named
Larry died. He had been ailing for some days, but the
killing of his <foreign rend='italic'>wingong</foreign> [totem] hastened his death.</q><note place='foot'>L. Fison and A. W. Howitt,
<hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi and Kurnai</hi>, p. 169. According
to Dr. Howitt, it is a serious
offence to kill the totem of another
person <q>with intent to injure him</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xviii. (1889) p. 53). Such an
intention seems to imply a belief in a
sympathetic connexion between the man
and the animal. Similarly the Siena
of the Ivory Coast, in West Africa,
who have totemism, believe that if a
man kills one of his totemic animals,
a member of his totemic clan dies
instantaneously. See Maurice Delafosse,
<q>Le peuple Siéna ou Sénoufo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue des Études Ethnographiques et
Sociologiques</hi>, i. (1908) p. 452.</note> Here
the killing of the crow caused the death of a man of the
Crow clan, exactly as, in the case of the sex-totems, the
killing of a bat causes the death of a Bat-man or the killing
of an owl causes the death of an Owl-woman. Similarly,
the killing of his <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> causes the death of a Central
American Indian, the killing of his bush soul causes the
death of a Calabar negro, the killing of his <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign> causes
the death of a Banks Islander, and the killing of the animal
in which his life is stowed away causes the death of the giant
or warlock in the fairy tale.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The savage
may imagine
his
life to be
bound up
with that
of more
animals
than one
at the same
time; for
many
savages
think that
every person
has
more souls
than one.</note>
Thus it appears that the story of <q>The giant who had no
heart in his body</q> may perhaps furnish the key to the relation
which is supposed to subsist between a man and his totem.
The totem, on this theory, is simply the receptacle in which
a man keeps his life, as Punchkin kept his life in a parrot,
and Bidasari kept her soul in a golden fish. It is no
valid objection to this view that when a savage has both
a sex totem and a clan totem his life must be bound up
with two different animals, the death of either of which
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
would entail his own. If a man has more vital places
than one in his body, why, the savage may think, should
he not have more vital places than one outside it? Why,
since he can put his life outside himself, should he not
transfer one portion of it to one animal and another to
another? The divisibility of life, or, to put it otherwise,
the plurality of souls, is an idea suggested by many familiar
facts, and has commended itself to philosophers like Plato,<note place='foot'>According to Plato, the different
parts of the soul were lodged in
different parts of the body (<hi rend='italic'>Timaeus</hi>,
pp. 69<hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>-72<hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>), and as only one part, on
his theory, was immortal, Lucian seems
not unnaturally to have interpreted the
Platonic doctrine to mean that every
man had more than one soul (<hi rend='italic'>Demonax</hi>,
33).</note>
as well as to savages. It finds favour also with the sages of
China, who tell us that every human being is provided with
what may be called a male soul (<foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>shen</foreign>) and a female soul
(<foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>kwei</foreign>), which by their harmonious co-operation compose an
organic unity. However, some Chinese philosophers will have
it that each of the five viscera has its own separate male soul
(<foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>shen</foreign>); and a Taoist treatise written about the end of the
tenth or beginning of the eleventh century has even enriched
science with a list of about three dozen souls distributed over
the various parts of the human frame; indeed, not content
with a bare catalogue of these souls, the learned author has
annexed to the name and surname of each a brief description
of its size and stature, of the kind of dress in which it
is clothed and the shape of hat it wears.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, iv. (Leyden, 1901)
pp. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 70-75.</note> It is only when
the notion of a soul, from being a quasi-scientific hypothesis,
becomes a theological dogma that its unity and indivisibility
are insisted upon as essential. The savage, unshackled by
dogma, is free to explain the facts of life by the assumption
of as many souls as he thinks necessary. Hence, for example,
the Caribs supposed that there was one soul in the
head, another in the heart, and other souls at all the places
where an artery is felt pulsating.<note place='foot'>Le sieur de la Borde, <q>Relation
de l'Origine, Mœurs, Coustumes, Religion,
Guerres et Voyages des Caraibes
sauvages des Isles Antilles de l'Amerique,</q>
p. 15, in <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de divers Voyages
faits en Afrique et en l'Amerique</hi> (Paris,
1684).</note> Some of the Hidatsa
Indians explain the phenomena of gradual death, when the
extremities appear dead first, by supposing that man has four
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
souls, and that they quit the body, not simultaneously, but
one after the other, dissolution being only complete when all
four have departed.<note place='foot'>Washington Matthews, <hi rend='italic'>The
Hidatsa Indians</hi> (Washington, 1877),
p. 50.</note> Some of the Dyaks of Borneo and the
Malays of the Peninsula believe that every man has seven
souls.<note place='foot'>H. Ling Roth, <q>Low's Natives of
Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxi. (1892) p. 117; W. W.
Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi> (London, 1900),
p. 50.</note> The Alfoors of Poso in Celebes are of opinion that
he has three.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xxxix.
(1895) pp. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The natives of Laos suppose that the body
is the seat of thirty spirits, which reside in the hands, the feet,
the mouth, the eyes, and so on.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, iii. (Jena, 1867) p. 248.</note> Hence, from the primitive
point of view, it is perfectly possible that a savage should
have one soul in his sex totem and another in his clan
totem. However, as I have observed, sex totems have been
found nowhere but in Australia; so that as a rule the savage
who practises totemism need not have more than one soul
out of his body at a time.<note place='foot'>In some tribes, chiefly of North
American Indians, every man has an
individual or personal totem in addition
to the totem of his clan. This personal
totem is usually the animal of which
he dreamed during a long and solitary
fast at puberty. See <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and
Exogamy</hi>, i. 49-52, iii. 370-456, where
the relation of the individual or personal
totem (if we may call it so) to the
clan totem is discussed. It is quite
possible that, as some good authorities
incline to believe, the clan totem has
been developed out of the personal
totem by inheritance. See Miss Alice
C. Fletcher, <hi rend='italic'>The Import of the Totem</hi>,
pp. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (paper read before the
American Association for the Advancement
of Science, August 1887,
separate reprint); Fr. Boas, <q>The
Social Organization and the Secret
Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Report of the United States National
Museum for 1895</hi> (Washington, 1897),
pp. 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 336-338, 393. In the
bush souls of the Calabar negroes (see
above, pp. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) we seem to have
something like the personal totem on
its way to become hereditary and so to
grow into the totem of a clan.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Battas of
Sumatra,
who have
totemism,
believe that
every person
has a
soul which
is always
outside of
his body.</note>
If this explanation of the totem as a receptacle in which
a man keeps his soul or one of his souls is correct, we should
expect to find some totemic people of whom it is expressly
said that every man amongst them is believed to keep at
least one soul permanently out of his body, and that the
destruction of this external soul is supposed to entail the
death of its owner. Such a people are the Battas of Sumatra.
The Battas are divided into exogamous clans (<foreign rend='italic'>margas</foreign>) with
descent in the male line; and each clan is forbidden to eat
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
the flesh of a particular animal. One clan may not eat the
tiger, another the ape, another the crocodile, another the dog,
another the cat, another the dove, another the white buffalo,
and another the locust. The reason given by members of a
clan for abstaining from the flesh of the particular animal is
either that they are descended from animals of that species,
and that their souls after death may transmigrate into the
animals, or that they or their forefathers have been under
certain obligations to the creatures. Sometimes, but not
always, the clan bears the name of the animal.<note place='foot'>J. B. Neumann, <q>Het Pane- en
Bila-stroomgebied op het eiland
Sumatra,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
Tweede Serie, dl. iii. Afdeeling, meer
uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2 (1886), pp.
311 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, dl. iv. No. 1 (1887), pp.
8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Van Hoëvell, <q>Iets over 't
oorlogvoeren der Batta's,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Nederlandsch Indië</hi>, N.S., vii.
(1878) p. 434; G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>Verspreide
Geschriften</hi> (The Hague, 1912),
i. 296, 306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 309, 325 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. de
Backer, <hi rend='italic'>L'Archipel Indien</hi> (Paris,
1874), p. 470; Col. Yule, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, ix.
(1880) p. 295; Joachim Freiherr von
Brenner, <hi rend='italic'>Besuch bei den Kannibalen
Sumatras</hi> (Würzburg, 1894), pp. 197
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; P. A. L. E. van Dijk, <q>Eenige
aanteekeningen omtrent de verschillenden
stammen (<foreign rend='italic'>Margas</foreign>) en de stamverdeling
bij de Battaks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxxviii. (1895) pp. 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
M. Joustra, <q>Naar het landschap
Goenoeng,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege
het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlv. (1901) pp. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Het leven, de zeden en gewoonten
der Bataks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege
het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlvi. (1902) pp. 387 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. E. Neumann,
<q>Kemali, Pantang, en Rĕboe
bij de Karo-Bataks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xlviii. (1906) p. 512. See further
<hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>, ii. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Thus the
Battas have totemism in full. But, further, each Batta
believes that he has seven or, on a more moderate computation,
three souls. One of these souls is always outside
the body, but nevertheless whenever it dies, however far
away it may be at the time, that same moment the man dies
also.<note place='foot'>B. Hagen, <q>Beiträge zur Kenntniss
der Battareligion,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxviii. (1883) p. 514. J. B. Neumann
(<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> dl. iii. No. 2, pp. 299) is the
authority for the seven souls. According
to another writer, six out of the seven
souls reside outside of the body; one of
them dwells in heaven, the remaining
five have no definite place of abode,
but are so closely related to the man
that were they to abandon him his
health would suffer. See J. Freiherr
von Brenner, <hi rend='italic'>Besuch bei den Kannibalen
Sumatras</hi>, pp. 239 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> A different
account of Batta psychology is given by
Mr. Westenberg. According to him,
each Batta has only one <foreign rend='italic'>tendi</foreign> (not three
or seven of them); and the <foreign rend='italic'>tendi</foreign> is
something between a soul and a guardian
spirit. It always resides outside
of the body, and on its position near,
before, behind, above, or below, the
welfare of its owner is supposed in
great measure to depend. But in
addition each man has two invisible
guardian spirits (his <foreign rend='italic'>kaka</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>agi</foreign>)
whose help he invokes in great danger;
one is the seed by which he was
begotten, the other is the afterbirth,
and these he calls respectively his elder
and his younger brother. Mr. Westenberg's
account refers specially to the
Karo-Battas. See C. J. Westenberg,
<q>Aanteekeningen omtrent de godsdienstige
begrippen der Karo-Bataks,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indië</hi>,
xli. (1892) pp. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The writer who mentions this belief says nothing
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
about the Batta totems; but on the analogy of the Australian,
Central American, and African evidence we may conjecture
that the external soul, whose death entails the death of the
man, is housed in the totemic animal or plant.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>If a totem
is the receptacle
in which a
man keeps
his external
soul, it is
no wonder
that
savages
should conceal
the
secret from
strangers.</note>
Against this view it can hardly be thought to militate
that the Batta does not in set terms affirm his external
soul to be in his totem, but alleges other grounds for
respecting the sacred animal or plant of his clan. For
if a savage seriously believes that his life is bound up
with an external object, it is in the last degree unlikely
that he will let any stranger into the secret. In all that
touches his inmost life and beliefs the savage is exceedingly
suspicious and reserved; Europeans have resided
among savages for years without discovering some of their
capital articles of faith, and in the end the discovery has
often been the result of accident.<note place='foot'>Compare Ch. Hose and W.
McDougall, <hi rend='italic'>The Pagan Tribes of
Borneo</hi> (London, 1912), ii. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>:
<q>An important institution among some
of the Ibans, which occurs but in rare
instances among the other peoples, is
the <foreign rend='italic'>ngarong</foreign> or secret helper. The
<foreign rend='italic'>ngarong</foreign> is one of the very few topics in
regard to which the Ibans display any
reluctance to speak freely. So great is
their reserve in this connection that
one of us lived for fourteen years on
friendly terms with Ibans of various
districts without ascertaining the meaning
of the word <foreign rend='italic'>ngarong</foreign>, or suspecting
the great importance of the part played
by the notion in the lives of some of
these people. The <foreign rend='italic'>ngarong</foreign> seems to
be usually the spirit of some ancestor
or dead relative, but not always so, and
it is not clear that it is always conceived
as the spirit of a deceased
human being. This spirit becomes
the special protector of some individual
Iban, to whom in a dream he
manifests himself, in the first place in
human form, and announces that he
will be his secret helper.... When,
as is most commonly the case, the
secret helper takes on the form of
some animal, all individuals of that
species become objects of especial
regard to the fortunate Iban; he will
not kill or eat any such animal, and
he will as far as possible restrain others
from doing so.</q> Thus the <foreign rend='italic'>ngarong</foreign>
or secret helper of the Ibans closely
resembles what I have called the individual
or personal totem.</note> Above all, the savage
lives in an intense and perpetual dread of assassination by
sorcery; the most trifling relics of his person&mdash;the clippings
of his hair and nails, his spittle, the remnants of his food, his
very name<note place='foot'>It is not merely the personal name
which is often shrouded in mystery (see
<hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</hi>, pp.
318 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>); the names of the clans and
their subdivisions are objects of mysterious
reverence among many, if not all,
of the Siouan tribes of North America,
and are never used in ordinary conversation.
See J. Owen Dorsey, <q>Osage
Traditions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Annual Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1888), p. 396. Among the Yuin of
South-Eastern Australia <q>the totem
name was called <foreign rend='italic'>Budjan</foreign>, and it was
said to be more like <foreign rend='italic'>Joïa</foreign>, or magic,
than a name; and it was in one sense
a secret name, for with it an enemy
might cause injury to its bearer by magic.
Thus very few people knew the totem
names of others, the name being told
to a youth by his father at his initiation</q>
(A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi>, London, 1904,
p. 133).</note>&mdash;all these may, he fancies, be turned by the
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
sorcerer to his destruction, and he is therefore anxiously
careful to conceal or destroy them. But if in matters such
as these, which are but the outposts and outworks of his life,
he is so shy and secretive, how close must be the concealment,
how impenetrable the reserve in which he enshrouds
the inner keep and citadel of his being! When the princess
in the fairy tale asks the giant where he keeps his soul, he
often gives false or evasive answers, and it is only after
much coaxing and wheedling that the secret is at last wrung
from him. In his jealous reticence the giant resembles the
timid and furtive savage; but whereas the exigencies of the
story demand that the giant should at last reveal his secret,
no such obligation is laid on the savage; and no inducement
that can be offered is likely to tempt him to imperil his soul
by revealing its hiding-place to a stranger. It is therefore
no matter for surprise that the central mystery of the savage's
life should so long have remained a secret, and that we should
be left to piece it together from scattered hints and fragments
and from the recollections of it which linger in fairy tales.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. The Ritual of Death and Resurrection.'/>
<head>§ 5. The Ritual of Death and Resurrection.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>This
view of
totemism
may help
to explain
the rite of
death and
resurrection
which
forms part
of many
initiatory
ceremonies
among
savages.</note>
This view of totemism throws light on a class of religious
rites of which no adequate explanation, so far as I am aware,
has yet been offered. Amongst many savage tribes, especially
such as are known to practise totemism, it is customary
for lads at puberty to undergo certain initiatory rites, of
which one of the commonest is a pretence of killing the lad
and bringing him to life again. Such rites become intelligible
if we suppose that their substance consists in extracting the
youth's soul in order to transfer it to his totem. For the
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
extraction of his soul would naturally be supposed to kill the
youth or at least to throw him into a death-like trance, which
the savage hardly distinguishes from death. His recovery
would then be attributed either to the gradual recovery of his
system from the violent shock which it had received, or, more
probably, to the infusion into him of fresh life drawn from
the totem. Thus the essence of these initiatory rites, so far
as they consist in a simulation of death and resurrection,
would be an exchange of life or souls between the man and
his totem. The primitive belief in the possibility of such an
exchange of souls comes clearly out in the story of the
Basque hunter who affirmed that he had been killed by a
bear, but that the bear had, after killing him, breathed its
own soul into him, so that the bear's body was now dead,
but he himself was a bear, being animated by the bear's
soul.<note place='foot'>Theodor Benfey, <hi rend='italic'>Pantschatantra</hi>
(Leipsic, 1859), i. 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Similarly
a man of the Kulin tribe in Victoria
was called Kurburu, that is, <q>native
bear,</q> because the spirit of a native
bear was supposed to have entered into
him when he killed the animal, and
to have endowed him with its wonderful
cleverness. This I learn from Miss
E. B. Howitt's <hi rend='italic'>Folklore and Legends
of some Victorian Tribes</hi> (chapter vi.),
which I have been privileged to see
in manuscript. Among the Chiquites
Indians of Paraguay sickness was sometimes
accounted for by supposing that
the soul of a deer or a turtle had entered
into the patient. See <hi rend='italic'>Lettres Édifiantes
et Curieuses</hi>, Nouvelle Édition,
viii. (Paris, 1781) p. 339. We have
seen (pp. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) that the Indians of
Honduras made an alliance with the
animal that was to be their <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign>
by offering some of their own blood
to it. Conversely the North American
Indian kills the animal which is to be
his personal totem, and thenceforth
wears some part of the creature as
an amulet (<hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>,
i. 50). These facts seem to point
to the establishment of a blood covenant,
involving an interchange of life
between a man and his personal totem
or <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign>; and among the Fans of
West Africa, as we saw (above, p.
<ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>), such a covenant is actually supposed
to exist between a sorcerer and
his <foreign rend='italic'>elangela</foreign>.</note> This revival of the dead hunter as a bear is exactly
analogous to what, on the theory here suggested, is supposed
to take place in the ceremony of killing a lad at puberty
and bringing him to life again. The lad dies as a man and
comes to life again as an animal; the animal's soul is now
in him, and his human soul is in the animal. With good
right, therefore, does he call himself a Bear or a Wolf, etc.,
according to his totem; and with good right does he treat
the bears or the wolves, etc., as his brethren, since in these
animals are lodged the souls of himself and his kindred.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rite
of death
and resurrection
among the
Wonghi of
New South
Wales.</note>
Examples of this supposed death and resurrection at
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
initiation are as follows. In the Wonghi or Wonghibon
tribe of New South Wales <q>the youths on approaching
manhood attend a meeting of the tribe. The ceremonies
of initiation are secret, and at them none but the men of the
tribe who have been initiated attend with the novices. At
the spot where the ceremonies are to be performed, a large
oval space is cleared. The old men of the tribe conduct the
ceremonies, and the <q>medicine man</q> of the tribe is the master
of them. Part of the proceedings consists in knocking out
a tooth and giving a new designation to the novice, indicating
the change from youth to manhood. When the tooth is
knocked out, a loud humming noise is heard, which is made
with an instrument of the following description: a flat piece
of wood is made with serrated edges, and having a hole at
one end, to which a string is attached, and this swung round
produces a humming noise. The uninitiated are not even
allowed to see this instrument. Women are forbidden to be
present at these ceremonies, and should one, by accident or
otherwise, witness them, the penalty is death. The penalty
for revealing the secrets is probably the same. When everything
is prepared the women and children are covered with
boughs, and the men retire, with the young fellows who are
to be initiated, to a little distance. It is said that the youths
are sent away a short distance one by one, and that they are
each met in turn by a Being, who, so far as I can understand,
is believed to be something between a blackfellow and a spirit.
This Being, called Thuremlin, it is said, takes the youth to a
distance, kills him, and in some instances cuts him up, after
which he restores him to life and knocks out a tooth. Their
belief in the power of Thuremlin is undoubted.</q><note place='foot'>A. L. P. Cameron, <q>Notes on
some Tribes of New South Wales,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xiv. (1885) pp. 357 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare
A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi> (London, 1904),
pp. 588 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Use of the
bull-roarer
at initiatory
ceremonies
in
Australia. The
sound of
the bull-roarer
compared
to thunder. Belief of
the Dieri
that by
sounding a
bull-roarer
a newly
initiated
young man
produces a
supply of
edible
snakes and
lizards.</note>
The foregoing account, while it applies strictly to one
tribe only, may be regarded as typical of the initiation ceremonies
performed on young men throughout the tribes of
South-Eastern and Central Australia, except that among the
Central tribes the practice of knocking out a tooth on these
occasions is replaced by the equally mysterious and much
severer bodily mutilations of circumcision and subincision,
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
which are not practised by the tribes of the South-East.<note place='foot'>Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen,
<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of Central Australia</hi>
(London, 1899), pp. 213, 453.</note>
The instrument whose humming or booming sound accompanies
the critical operation of knocking out the tooth of
the novice, is the now well-known bull-roarer, which figures
in many savage rites of initiation. Its true nature is concealed
from the women and uninitiated lads, who are taught
to believe that its sonorous and long-drawn notes are the
voice of the mythical being, often called Daramulun, who
lives in the sky, instituted the rites, and superintends their
performance. The hollow roar of the slat of wood, as it is
swung round and round, <q>represents the muttering of thunder,
and the thunder is the voice of Daramulun, and therefore its
sound is of the most sacred character. Umbara once said to
me, <q>Thunder is the voice of him (pointing upward to the
sky) calling on the rain to fall and make everything grow
up new.</q></q><note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi> (London, 1904),
p. 538. As to Daramulun (of whose
name Thuremlin is no doubt only a
dialectical variation) see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 407,
493, 494 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 497, 499, 500, 507,
523 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 526, 528, 529 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 535, 540,
541, 585 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 587; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>On some
Australian Ceremonies of Initiation,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xiii. (1884) pp. 442, 443, 446,
447, 448, 450, 451, 452, 455, 456,
459. On the bull-roarer see Andrew
Lang, <hi rend='italic'>Custom and Myth</hi> (London,
1884), pp. 29-44; J. D. E. Schmeltz,
<hi rend='italic'>Das Schwirrholz</hi> (Hamburg, 1896);
A. C. Haddon, <hi rend='italic'>The Study of Man</hi>
(London and New York, 1898), pp.
277-327; J. G. Frazer, <q>On some
Ceremonies of the Central Australian
Aborigines,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Australasian
Association for the Advancement
of Science for the Year 1900</hi> (Melbourne,
1901), pp. 317-322. The religious or
magical use of the bull-roarer is best
known in Australia. See, for example,
L. Fison and A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi
and Kurnai</hi> (Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide,
and Brisbane, 1880), pp. 267-269;
A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes
of South-East Australia</hi>, pp. 354, 509
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 514, 515, 517, 569, 571, 575,
578, 579, 582, 583, 584, 589, 592,
594, 595, 606, 659 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 670, 672,
696, 715; Baldwin Spencer and F. J.
Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of Central Australia</hi>
(London, 1899), pp. 246, 344,
347; W. Baldwin Spencer, <hi rend='italic'>Introduction
to the Study of Certain Native
Tribes of the Northern Territory</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin of the Northern Territory</hi>,
No. 2) (Melbourne, 1912), pp. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
23, 24, 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 37 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. R. Brown,
<q>Three Tribes of Western Australia,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xliii. (1913) pp. 168, 174; R.
Pettazzoni, <q>Mythologie Australienne
du Rhombe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de l'Histoire des
Religions</hi>, lxv. (1912) pp. 149-170.
But in the essay just referred to
Mr. Andrew Lang shewed that the
instrument has been similarly employed
not only by savages in various
parts of the world, but also by the
ancient Greeks in their religious mysteries.
In the Torres Straits Islands
it is used both at the initiation of
young men and as a magical instrument.
See <hi rend='italic'>Reports of the Cambridge
Anthropological Expedition to Torres
Straits</hi>, v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 217,
218, 219, 328, 330-333, 346, 352.
In various parts of New Guinea it is
sounded at the initiation of young men
and is carefully concealed from women;
the sound is thought to be the voice of a
spirit. See Rev. J. Chalmers, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering
in New Guinea</hi> (London, 1887),
p. 85; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Toaripi,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxvii. (1898)
p. 329; Rev. J. Holmes, <q>Initiation
Ceremonies of Natives of the Papuan
Gulf,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902) pp. 420, 424
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; O. Schellong, <q>Das Barlum-fest
der Gegend Finsch-hafens,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, ii.
(1889) pp. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 154 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F.
Grabowsky, <q>Der Bezirk von Hatzfeldthafen
und seine Bewohner,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Petermanns
Mitteilungen</hi>, xli. (1895) p.
189; B. Hagen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den Papua's</hi>
(Wiesbaden, 1899), pp. 188 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Max
Krieger, <hi rend='italic'>Neu-Guinea</hi> (Berlin, preface
dated 1899), pp. 168 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. Vetter,
in <hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen der Geographischen
Gesellschaft zu Jena</hi>, xi. (1892) p.
105; K. Vetter, in <hi rend='italic'>Nachrichten über
Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel,
1897</hi> (Berlin), p. 93;
R. Neuhauss, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>
(Berlin, 1911), pp. 36, 297, 403, 406
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 410-412, 494 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Otto Reche,
<hi rend='italic'>Der Kaiserin-Augusta-Fluss</hi> (Hamburg,
1913), pp. 349 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Ergebnisse
der Südsee-Expedition 1908-1910</hi>, herausgegeben
von G. Thilenius). It is
similarly used at the circumcision-festivals
in the French Islands, to the
west of New Britain (R. Parkinson,
<hi rend='italic'>Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</hi>, Stuttgart,
1907, pp. 640 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), and it is employed
at mysteries or mourning ceremonies
in Bougainville and other Melanesian
Islands. See R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 658 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Ethnographie
der Nordwestlichen Salomo Inseln</hi> (Berlin,
1899), p. 11; R. H. Codrington,
<hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi> (Oxford, 1891), pp.
98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 342. Among the Minangkabauers
of Sumatra the bull-roarer
(<foreign rend='italic'>gasiĕng</foreign>) is used by a rejected lover
to induce the demons to carry off the
soul of the jilt and so drive her mad.
It is made of the frontal bone of a
brave or skilful man, and some of the
intended victim's hair is attached to it.
See J. L. van der Toorn, <q>Het animisme
bij den Minangkabauer in der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch Indië</hi>, xxxix. (1890) pp.
55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Among the Yoruba-speaking
negroes of the Slave Coast in West
Africa, particularly at Abeokuta, the
sound of the bull-roarer is supposed to
be the voice of a great bogey named
Oro, whose votaries compose a secret
society under the name of Ogboni.
When the sound of the bull-roarer is
heard in the streets, every woman must
shut herself up in her house and not
look out of the window under pain of
death. See R. F. Burton, <hi rend='italic'>Abeokuta
and the Cameroons Mountains</hi> (London,
1863), i. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;, Missionary Chautard,
in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</hi>,
lv. (Lyons, 1883) pp. 192-198; Missionary
Baudin, <q>Le Fétichisme,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les
Missions Catholiques</hi>, xvi. (1884) p.
257; P. Bouche, <hi rend='italic'>La Côte des Esclaves
et le Dahomey</hi> (Paris, 1885), p. 124;
Mrs. R. B. Batty and Governor Moloney,
<q>Notes on the Yoruba Country,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xix. (1890) pp. 160-164; A. B. Ellis,
<hi rend='italic'>The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the
Slave Coast of West Africa</hi> (London,
1894), pp. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; R. H. Stone, <hi rend='italic'>In
Afric's Forest and Jungle</hi> (Edinburgh
and London, 1900), p. 88; L. Frobenius,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Masken und Geheimbünde
Afrikas</hi> (Halle, 1898), pp. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Nova Acta, Abh. der Kaiserl. Leop.-Carol.
Deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher</hi>,
vol. lxxiv. No. 1). Among
the Nandi of British East Africa and
the Bushongo of the Congo region bull-roarers
are sounded by men to frighten
novices at initiation. See A. C. Hollis,
<hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford, 1909), pp. 40,
56; E. Torday and T. A. Joyce, <hi rend='italic'>Les
Bushongo</hi> (Brussels, 1910), p. 82.
Among the Caffres of South Africa
and the Boloki of the Upper Congo
the bull-roarer is a child's toy, but yet
is thought to be endowed with magical
virtue. See below, p. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> note 3. Among
the Koskimo Indians of British Columbia the sound of the bull-roarers is
supposed to be the voice of a spirit who
comes to fetch away the novices. See
Franz Boas, <q>The Social Organization
and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl
Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of the United States
National Museum</hi> (Washington, 1897),
p. 610. The bull-roarer is used as a
sacred or magical instrument for the
making of rain by the Zuñi and other
Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New
Mexico, also by the Navajos and
Apaches of the same region, and by
the Utes of Nevada and Utah. See
Dr. Washington Matthews, <q>The
Mountain Chant, a Navajo Ceremony,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1887), pp.
435, 436; Captain J. G. Bourke,
<q>The Medicine-men of the Apache,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Ninth Annual Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1892), pp.
476-479; Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson,
<q>The Zuñi Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Twenty-third
Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1904), pp.
115, 117, 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 175, 177, 355.
The Guatusos of Costa Rica ascertain
the will of the deity by listening
to the humming sound of the bull-roarer.
See Dr. C. Sapper, <q>Ein
Besuch bei den Guatusos in Costarica,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxvi. (1899) p. 352; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Beiträge zur Ethnographie des südlichen
Mittelamerika,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Petermanns
Mitteilungen</hi>, xlvii. (1901) p. 36.
The Caripunas Indians of the Madeira
River, in Brazil, sound bull-roarers in
lamentations for the dead. See Franz
Keller, <hi rend='italic'>The Amazon and Madeira
Rivers</hi> (London, 1874), p. 124. The
Bororo of Brazil also swing bull-roarers
at their festivals of the dead; the sound
of them is the signal for the women to
hide themselves; it is believed that
women and children would die if they
saw a bull-roarer. See K. von den
Steinen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasilien's</hi>
(Berlin, 1894), pp. 497-499.
The Nahuqua and other Brazilian
tribes use bull-roarers in their masked
dances, but make no mystery of them.
See K. von den Steinen, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
327 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the magical use of the
bull-roarer, see pp. 230 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> This supposed resemblance of the sound to
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
thunder probably explains a certain use which the Dieri, a
tribe of Central Australia, made of the instrument. When
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
a young man had passed through an initiatory rite, which
consisted in cutting a row of gashes in his back, he was
given a bull-roarer, and when he went out in search of game,
he used to twirl the implement in the belief that by doing
so, while his wounds were still unhealed, he created a good
harvest of snakes, lizards, and other reptiles, which the
natives employ as food; but on the contrary they imagined
that these supplies of food would be cut off for ever, if a
woman were to see a bull-roarer which had been swung at
the rites of initiation.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>The Dieri and
other Kindred Tribes of Central Australia,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xx. (1891) p. 83; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Native
Tribes of South-East Australia</hi>, p. 660.
In the latter passage Dr. Howitt omits
the not unimportant particular that the
bull-roarer is swung for this purpose by
the young man <emph>before his wounds are
healed</emph>.</note> No doubt these savages, living in a
parched wilderness where the existence of plants and animals
depends on rare and irregular showers,<note place='foot'>On the desert nature of Central
Australia and the magical-like change
wrought in its fauna and flora by heavy
rain, see Baldwin Spencer and F. J.
Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of Central Australia</hi>
(London, 1899), pp. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>, i. 170 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
316 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 341 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. G. Frazer,
<q>Howitt and Fison,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xx.
(1909) pp. 160, 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 164.</note> have observed that
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
the fall of rain is regularly followed by a great and sudden
increase in the food supply, and that this increase is most
marked after violent thunder-storms. Hence by making a
noise like thunder with the help of bull-roarers they probably
hope, on the principle of imitative magic, to bring on a
thunder-storm and with it a fertilizing deluge of rain.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
bull-roarer
used by the
Indians
of New
Mexico and
Arizona
to procure
rain. The bull-roarer
used
in Torres
Straits
Islands to
produce
wind
and good
crops.</note>
For the same reason in the parched and torrid regions of
Arizona and New Mexico the Indians make great use of the
bull-roarer in their ceremonies for procuring rain. For example,
when Captain Bourke was at the Pueblo Indian village
of Walpi in the month of August, 1881, he saw the instrument
in use at the snake dance. <q>The medicine-men twirled it
rapidly, and with a uniform motion, about the head and from
front to rear, and succeeded in faithfully imitating the sound
of a gust of rain-laden wind. As explained to me by one
of the medicine-men, by making this sound they compelled
the wind and rain to come to the aid of the crops. At a later
date I found it in use among the Apache, and for the same
purpose.</q><note place='foot'>Captain J. G. Bourke, <q>The
Medicine-men of the Apache,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Ninth
Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1892), pp. 476
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Zuñi Indians of New Mexico whirl bull-roarers
<q>to create enthusiasm</q> among the mythical beings
who are supposed to cause rain, or for the purpose of making
them gather in the air over the village.<note place='foot'>Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson,
<q>The Zuñi Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Twenty-third
Annual Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1904), pp.
115, 355.</note> In a Zuñi rain-making
ceremony, while one medicine-man whirls a bull-roarer,
another whips up a mixture of water and meal
into frothy suds symbolic of clouds, and a third plays a flute.
<q>All this is an invocation to the gods for rain&mdash;the one
great and perpetual prayer of the people of this arid
land.</q><note place='foot'>Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 175; compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
177.</note> This supposed connexion of the instrument with
thunder-storms explains why the Navajos of the same torrid
country say that the bull-roarer should always be made of
wood from a pine-tree that has been struck by lightning;<note place='foot'>Dr. Washington Matthews, <q>The
Navajo Chant,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Fifth Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1887), p. 436; compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, p.
435, where the sound of the bull-roarer
is said to be <q>like that of a
rain storm.</q></note>
and why the Bakairi of Brazil call the unpretentious
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
instrument by a name that means <q>thunder and lightning.</q><note place='foot'>Karl von den Steinen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den
Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</hi> (Berlin,
1894), p. 328.</note>
The resemblance of the sound of the bull-roarer to the
roaring of the wind is doubtless the reason why in the Torres
Straits Islands wizards whirled bull-roarers in order to make
the wind to blow,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological
Expedition to Torres Straits</hi>,
v. (Cambridge, 1904) p. 352.</note> and why, when Caffres wish for calm
weather, they forbid boys to play with bull-roarers, because
they think that the booming noise attracts a gale of wind.<note place='foot'>G. McCall Theal, <hi rend='italic'>Kaffir Folk-lore</hi>
(London, 1886), pp. 222 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Records of South-Eastern Africa</hi>, vii.
(1901) p. 456; Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The
Essential Kafir</hi> (London, 1904), p.
333. For an analogous reason among
the Boloki of the Upper Congo the
elders do not like when boys play
with bull-roarers, because the sound
resembles the growl of a leopard and
will attract these ferocious animals.
See Rev. John H. Weeks, <hi rend='italic'>Among
Congo Cannibals</hi> (London, 1913), p.
157.</note>
Hence, as an instrument whose sound resembles the rumbling
of thunder, the roar of wind, and the patter of rain, the bull-roarer
is naturally swung by agricultural savages as a powerful
means of promoting the growth of the crops. In the
island of Kiwai, off the mouth of the Fly River in British
New Guinea, bull-roarers are whirled in order to ensure a
good crop of yams, sweet potatoes, and bananas.<note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, <hi rend='italic'>Head-hunters, Black,
White, and Brown</hi> (London, 1901), p.
104; <hi rend='italic'>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological
Expedition to Torres Straits</hi>,
v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 218, 219;
Rev. J. Chalmers, <q>Notes on the
Natives of Kiwai Island,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxiii.
(1903) p. 119.</note> Similarly
the Yabim of German New Guinea imagine that by twirling
bull-roarers while they mention the names of the dead they
produce a fine crop of taro.<note place='foot'>H. Zahn, <q>Die Jabim,</q> in R.
Neuhauss's <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi> (Berlin,
1911), iii. 333.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
whirling
of bull-roarers
by
young men
with bleeding
backs
in Australia
seems to
have been
a rain-making
ceremony.</note>
But why among the Dieri of Central Australia should
the power of attracting rain and so ensuring a supply of
food be specially attributed to a young man whose back has
just been scored and whose wounds are still raw? Perhaps
the reason may be that the blood dripping from the gashes
is thought to resemble rain and therefore to be endowed with
a magical potency of drawing showers from the clouds. The
conjecture is confirmed by the observation that the Dieri
actually do bleed themselves avowedly for the purpose of
making rain, and they are not the only people in Australia
and elsewhere who have resorted to this singular mode of
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
putting an end to a drought.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 256-258.</note> Altogether the foregoing
evidence seems to hint that the whole virtue of the bull-roarer
resides, as its English name implies, in its voice, and
that its original significance was simply that of a magical
instrument for causing thunder, wind, and rain.<note place='foot'>This appears to be the view also of
Professor K. von den Steinen (<hi rend='italic'>Unter den
Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</hi>, pp.
327 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), who is probably right in thinking
that the primary intention of the instrument
is to make thunder, and that
the idea of making rain is secondary.</note> When these
natural phenomena came to be personified as spirits, the
sound of the bull-roarer was naturally interpreted as their
voice.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
sound of
the bull-roarer
at
initiation is
believed by
Australian
women and
children
to be the
voice of a
spirit, who
carries
away the
novices.</note>
Among the tribes on the Brisbane River in Queensland
the weird sound of the bull-roarers swung at initiation was
believed by the women and children to be made by the
wizards in swallowing the boys and bringing them up again
as young men. The Ualaroi of the Upper Darling River
said that the boy met a ghost, who killed him and brought
him to life again as a young man. Among the natives on
the Lower Lachlan and Murray Rivers it was Thrumalun
(Daramulun) who was thought to slay and resuscitate the
novices.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>On Australian
Medicine Men,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xvi. (1887) pp. 47
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi>, p. 596.</note> In the Arunta tribe of Central Australia, at the
moment when the lads are being circumcised, the bull-roarer
sounds in the darkness all round the ceremonial ground;
and the awestruck women, listening in the distance, believe
that it is the voice of a spirit called Twanyirika, who lives
in wild and inaccessible regions and only comes out when a
youth is initiated. They think that the spirit enters the body
of the lad after the operation of circumcision has been performed
and carries him away into the bush, keeping him there
till his wound is healed. While the newly circumcised youth
is out in the wilds, carefully secluded from the sight of the
women and children, he constantly sounds the bull-roarer.
When he has recovered from the wound, the spirit leaves
him and he returns to camp an initiated, or rather partially
initiated, man. He has learned, at all events, the secret of
Twanyirika; for no sooner is he circumcised than an elder
brother comes up to him, and placing in his hands a bundle
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
of sacred sticks or stones (<foreign rend='italic'>churinga</foreign>), says, <q>Here is Twanyirika,
of whom you have heard so much. They are <foreign rend='italic'>churinga</foreign> and
will help you to heal quickly; guard them well, or else you
and your mothers and sisters will be killed.</q><note place='foot'>Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen,
<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of Central Australia</hi>, p.
246 note 1; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Northern Tribes of
Central Australia</hi> (London, 1904), p.
497. According to the classificatory
system of relationship, which prevails
among all the aborigines of Australia,
a man may have, and generally has, a
number of women who stand to him in
the relation of mother as well as of
sister, though there need not be a drop
of blood in common between them, as
we count kin. This explains the reference
in the text to a boy's <q>mothers.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In some
Australian
tribes the
women
believe that
lads at
initiation
are killed
and
brought to
life again
by a spirit,
whose
voice is
heard in
the sound
of the bull-roarer.</note>
In this account nothing is said about killing the lad and
bringing him to life again; but a belief in the death and
resurrection of the novices at initiation is expressly affirmed
to be part of the feminine creed in other tribes of Central
Australia. Thus in the Unmatjera tribe both women and
children believe that Twanyirika kills the youth and afterwards
brings him to life again during the period of initiation.
The rites of initiation in this tribe, as in the other Central
tribes, comprise the operations of circumcision and subincision;
and as soon as the second of these has been performed
on him, the young man receives from his father a
sacred stick (<foreign rend='italic'>churinga</foreign>), with which, he is told, his spirit was
associated in the remotest past. While he is out in the bush
recovering from his wounds, he must swing the bull-roarer,
or a being who lives up in the sky will swoop down and
carry him off.<note place='foot'>B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen,
<hi rend='italic'>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</hi>,
pp. 342 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 498.</note> In the Urabunna tribe of Central Australia
a lad at initiation receives a bull-roarer, the very name of
which (<foreign rend='italic'>chimbaliri</foreign>) is never heard by women and children.
They are taught to believe that the sound of it is the voice
of a spirit called Witurna, who takes the boy away, cuts out
all his bowels, provides him with a new set, and brings him
back an initiated youth. The lad is warned that on no
account may he allow a woman or a child to see the sacred
stick, else he and his mother and sisters will fall down as
dead as stones.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
498.</note> In the Binbinga tribe, on the western coast
of the Gulf of Carpentaria, the women and children believe
that the noise of the bull-roarer at initiation is made by a
spirit named Katajalina, who lives in an ant-hill and comes
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
out and eats up the boy, afterwards restoring him to life.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
366 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 501.</note>
Similarly among their neighbours the Anula the women
imagine that the droning sound of the bull-roarer is produced
by a spirit called Gnabaia, who swallows the lads at
initiation and afterwards disgorges them in the form of initiated
men. In this tribe, after a lad has been subincised
as well as circumcised, he is presented with a bull-roarer and
informed that the instrument was originally made by the
whirlwind, that it is sacred or tabooed, and that it may
on no account be shewn to women or children.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
373, 501.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A drama
of resurrection
from
the dead
used to be
shewn to
novices at
initiation
in some
tribes of
New South
Wales.
Dr.
Howitt's
description
of the
scene. The seeming
dead
man in
the grave. The resurrection
from the
grave.</note>
Among the tribes settled on the southern coast of New
South Wales, of which the Coast Murring tribe may be
regarded as typical, the drama of resurrection from the dead
was exhibited in a graphic form to the novices at initiation.
Before they were privileged to witness this edifying spectacle
they had been raised to the dignity of manhood by an old
man, who promoted them to their new status by the simple
process of knocking a tooth out of the mouth of each with
the help of a wooden chisel and hammer. The ceremony
of the resurrection has been described for us in detail by an
eye-witness, the late Dr. A. W. Howitt, one of the best
authorities on the customs of the Australian aborigines.
The scene selected for the sacred drama was the bottom
of a deep valley, where a sluggish stream wound through a
bed of tall sharp-edged sedge. Though the hour was between
ten and eleven o'clock in the morning, the sun had but just
peeped over the mountains which enclosed the valley like a
wall on the east; and while the upper slopes, clothed with
a forest of tall rowan trees, looked warm and bright in
sunshine, which shot between the grey stems and under
the light feathery foliage of the trees, all the bottom of
the dell was still in deep shadow and dank with the
moisture of the night's rain. While the novices rested and
warmed themselves at a crackling fire, the initiated men laid
their heads together, prepared a stock of decorations made
of stringy bark, and dug a grave. There was some discussion
as to the shape of the grave, but the man who was
to be buried in it decided the question by declaring that he
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
would be laid in it on his back at full length. He was a
man of the eagle-hawk totem and belonged to the tribal
subdivision called Yibai. So while two men under his
directions were digging the grave with sticks in the friable
granitic soil, he superintended the costume of the other
actors in the drama. Sheets of bark were beaten out into
fleeces of stringy fibre, and in these garments six performers
were clothed from head to foot so that not even
a glimpse could be obtained of their faces. Four of them
were tied together by a cord which was fastened to the back
of their heads, and each of them carried two pieces of bark
in his hands. The other two walked free, but hobbled along
bent double and supporting their tottery steps on staves to
mark the weight of years; for they played the part of two
medicine-men of venerable age and great magical power.
By this time the grave was ready, and the eagle-hawk man
stretched himself in it at full length on a bed of leaves, his
head resting on a rolled-up blanket, just as if he were a
corpse. In his two hands, crossed on his chest, he held the
stem of a young tree (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Persoonia linearis</foreign>), which had been
pulled up by the roots and now stood planted on his chest,
so that the top of it rose several feet above the level of the
ground. A light covering of dried sticks filled the grave, and
dead leaves, tufts of grass, and small plants were artistically
arranged over them so as to complete the illusion. All
being now ready, the novices were led by their sisters'
husbands to the grave and placed in a row beside it, while
a singer, perched on the trunk of a fallen tree at the head of
the grave, crooned a melancholy ditty, the song of Yibai.
Though the words of the song consisted merely of a monotonous
repetition of the words <foreign rend='italic'>Burrin-burrin Yibai</foreign>, that is,
Stringy-bark Yibai, they were understood to refer to the
eagle-hawk totem, as well as to the tribal subdivision of the
buried man. Then to the slow, plaintive but well-marked
air of the song the actors began to move forward, winding
among the trees, logs, and rocks. On came the four disguised
men, stepping in time to the music, swaying from side to
side, and clashing their bark clappers together at every step,
while beside them hobbled the two old men keeping a little
aloof to mark their superior dignity. They represented a
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
party of medicine-men, guided by two reverend seniors,
who had come on pilgrimage to the grave of a brother
medicine-man, him of the eagle-hawk totem, who lay buried
here in the lonely valley, now illumined by the warm rays
of the sun; for by this time the morning was wearing on
to noon. When the little procession, chanting an invocation
to Daramulun, had defiled from among the rocks and trees
into the open, it drew up on the side of the grave opposite
to the novices, the two old men taking up a position in the
rear of the dancers. For some time the dance and song
went on till the tree that seemed to grow from the grave
began to quiver. <q>Look there!</q> cried the sisters' husbands
to the novices, pointing to the trembling leaves.
As they looked, the tree quivered more and more, then was
violently agitated and fell to the ground, while amid
the excited dancing of the dancers and the chanting of
the tuneful choir the supposed dead man spurned from
him the superincumbent mass of sticks and leaves, and
springing to his feet danced his magic dance in the grave
itself, and exhibited in his mouth the magic substances
which he was supposed to have received from Daramulun
in person.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi>, pp. 554-556.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>On some Australian
Ceremonies of Initiation,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xiii.
(1884) pp. 453 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In some
Australian
tribes a
medicine-man
at his
initiation
is thought
to be killed
and raised
again from
the dead.</note>
In some tribes of Central and Northern Australia the
initiation of a medicine-man into the mysteries of his
craft is supposed to be accomplished by certain spirits,
who kill him, cut out his internal organs, and having provided
him with a new set bring him to life again. Sometimes
the spirits kindly replace the man's human organs by
their own spiritual organs; sometimes along with the new
organs they insert magical stones in his body or even a
serpent, and the stones or the serpents naturally endow the
new wizards with marvellous powers. In some tribes the
initiation takes place in a cave, where the spirits dwell.
After the man has been restored to life with a new heart,
a new pair of lungs, and so forth, he returns to his people
in a more or less dazed condition, which his friends may at
first mistake for insanity, though afterwards they recognize
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
its true character as inspiration.<note place='foot'>B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen,
<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of Central Australia</hi>,
pp. 523-525; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Northern Tribes of
Central Australia</hi>, 480 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 484, 485,
487, 488; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Across Australia</hi> (London,
1912), ii. 334 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> One eminent medical
practitioner in the Unmatjera tribe assured Messrs. Spencer
and Gillen that when he came to himself after the operation,
which in his case was performed by an aged doctor, he had
completely forgotten who he was and all about his past life.
After a time his venerable friend led him back to the camp
and shewed it to him, and said, <q>That woman there is your
wife,</q> for she had gone clean out of his head.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Northern
Tribes of Central Australia</hi>, pp. 480 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We shall
see presently that this temporary oblivion, a natural effect
of the shock to the nervous system produced by resuscitation
from the dead, is characteristic of novices under similar
circumstances in other lands. Among the Arunta of Alice
Springs the cave where the mystic initiation takes place is
a limestone cavern in a range of hills which rises to the
north of the wide level expanse known as the Emily plain.
None of the ordinary natives would dare to set foot in the
awful grotto, which they believe to extend for miles into the
bowels of the earth and to be tenanted by certain ancestral
spirits, who live there in perpetual sunshine and amid streams
of running water, an earthly paradise by contrast with the
arid sun-scorched steppes and barren mountains outside.
White men have explored the cave, and if they perceived
no spirits, they found bats in plenty. The man who aspires
to the rank of a wizard lies down at the mouth of the
cave and falls asleep; and as he sleeps one of the ancestral
spirits steals up to him and drives an invisible spear through
his neck from back to front. The point of the spear comes
out through the man's tongue, leaving a hole through which
you could put your little finger, and this hole the man
retains for the rest of his natural life, or at least so long as
he retains his magical powers; for if the hole should close
up, these spiritual gifts and graces would depart from him.
A second thrust from the invisible spear transfixes the man's
head from ear to ear; he drops down dead, and is immediately
transported into the depths of the cavern, where the
spirits dissect his dead body, extract the old viscera, and
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
replace them with a new set in the manner already described.<note place='foot'>F. J. Gillen, <q>Notes on some
Manners and Customs of the Aborigines
of the McDonnel Ranges belonging
to the Arunta Tribe,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Report on
the Work of the Horn Scientific Expedition
to Central Australia</hi>, Part iv.
<hi rend='italic'>Anthropology</hi> (London and Melbourne,
1896), pp. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; B. Spencer and
F. J. Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of Central
Australia</hi> (London, 1899), pp. 523
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Across Australia</hi> (London,
1912), ii. 335.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Notable
features in
the initiation
of
Australian
medicine-men.</note>
In this account of the manner in which medicine-men
obtain their magical powers not only are the supposed death
and resurrection of the novice worthy of attention, but also
the exchange of internal organs which in the Binbinga and
Mara tribes is supposed to be effected between the man
and the spirit;<note place='foot'>B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen,
<hi rend='italic'>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</hi>,
pp. 487, 488; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Across Australia</hi>,
ii. 481 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> for this exchange resembles that which, on
the theory I have suggested, may be thought to take place
between a lad and his totem at the ceremonies of initiation
which mark the momentous transition from boyhood to
manhood. Further, the bodily mutilation which is the
visible sign of the medicine-man's initiation (for however
the hole may be made it certainly exists in the tongues of
regular Arunta practitioners) corresponds to the bodily
mutilations of other sorts, which in many savage tribes
attest to the world that the mutilated persons are fullgrown
men. What the precise meaning of such mutilations may
be, still remains very obscure; but they seem in some cases
to be directly associated with the conception of death and
resurrection.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rites of
initiation in
some tribes
of German
New
Guinea. The
novices
thought
to be
swallowed
and disgorged
by
a monster,
whose
voice is
heard in
the hum
of the bull-roarers.</note>
This association certainly comes out plainly in the rites
of initiation through which in some parts of New Guinea
all lads must pass before they attain to the status of adults.
The rites are observed by a group of tribes who occupy
contiguous territories about Finsch Harbour and Huon
Gulf in German New Guinea. The tribes in question are
the Yabim, the Bukaua, the Kai, and the Tami. All of
them except the Kai belong to the Melanesian stock and
are therefore presumably immigrants from the adjoining
islands; but the Kai, who inhabit the rugged, densely
wooded, and rainy mountains inland from Finsch Harbour,
belong to the aboriginal Papuan stock and differ from their
neighbours in speech as well as in appearance. Yet the
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
rites of initiation which all these tribes celebrate and the
beliefs which they associate with them are so similar that
a single description will apply accurately enough to them all.
All of them, like many Australian tribes, require every male
member of the tribe to be circumcised before he ranks as
a full-grown man; and the tribal initiation, of which circumcision
is the central feature, is conceived by them, as by
some Australian tribes, as a process of being swallowed and
disgorged by a mythical monster, whose voice is heard in
the humming sound of the bull-roarer. Indeed the New
Guinea tribes not only impress this belief on the minds
of women and children, but enact it in a dramatic form
at the actual rites of initiation, at which no woman or uninitiated
person may be present. For this purpose a hut
about a hundred feet long is erected either in the village or
in a lonely part of the forest. It is modelled in the shape
of the mythical monster; at the end which represents his
head it is high, and it tapers away at the other end. A
betel-palm, grubbed up with the roots, stands for the backbone
of the great being and its clustering fibres for his
hair; and to complete the resemblance the butt end of the
building is adorned by a native artist with a pair of goggle
eyes and a gaping mouth. When after a tearful parting
from their mothers and women folk, who believe or pretend
to believe in the monster that swallows their dear ones, the
awe-struck novices are brought face to face with this imposing
structure, the huge creature emits a sullen growl,
which is in fact no other than the humming note of bull-roarers
swung by men concealed in the monster's belly.
The actual process of deglutition is variously enacted.
Among the Tami it is represented by causing the candidates
to defile past a row of men who hold bull-roarers over
their heads; among the Kai it is more graphically set forth
by making them pass under a scaffold on which stands a
man, who makes a gesture of swallowing and takes in fact
a gulp of water as each trembling novice passes beneath
him. But the present of a pig, opportunely offered for the
redemption of the youth, induces the monster to relent and
disgorge his victim; the man who represents the monster
accepts the gift vicariously, a gurgling sound is heard, and
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
the water which had just been swallowed descends in a jet on
the novice. This signifies that the young man has been
released from the monster's belly. However, he has now
to undergo the more painful and dangerous operation of
circumcision. It follows immediately, and the cut made by
the knife of the operator is explained to be a bite or scratch
which the monster inflicted on the novice in spewing him out
of his capacious maw. While the operation is proceeding, a
prodigious noise is made by the swinging of bull-roarers to
represent the roar of the dreadful being who is in the act
of swallowing the young men.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
return
of the
novices
after initiation.</note>
When, as sometimes happens, a lad dies from the effect
of the operation, he is buried secretly in the forest, and his
sorrowing mother is told that the monster has a pig's
stomach as well as a human stomach, and that unfortunately
her son slipped into the wrong stomach, from which it was
impossible to extricate him. After they have been circumcised
the lads must remain for some months in seclusion,
shunning all contact with women and even the sight of
them. They live in the long hut which represents the
monster's belly; among the Yabim they beguile the tedium
of this enforced leisure by weaving baskets and playing on
certain sacred flutes, which are never used except on these
occasions. The instruments are of two patterns. One is
called the male and the other the female; and they are
believed to be married to each other. No woman may see
these mysterious flutes; if she did, she would die. When
the long seclusion is over, the lads, now ranking as initiated
men, are brought back with great pomp and ceremony to
the village, where they are received with sobs and tears of
joy by the women, as if the grave had given up its dead.
At first the young men keep their eyes rigidly closed or
even sealed with a plaster of chalk, and they appear not
to understand the words of command which are given them
by an elder. Gradually, however, they come to themselves
as if awaking from a stupor, and next day they bathe and
wash off the crust of white chalk with which their bodies
had been coated.<note place='foot'>As to the initiatory rites among
the Yabim, see K. Vetter, in <hi rend='italic'>Nachrichten
über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land
und den Bismarck-Archipel</hi>, 1897,
pp. 92 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen der
Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</hi>,
xi. (1892) p. 105; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Komm herüber
und hilf uns!</hi> ii. (Barmen, 1898) p.
18; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, cited by M. Krieger, <hi rend='italic'>Neu-Guinea</hi>
(Berlin, preface dated 1899),
pp. 167-170; O. Schellong, <q>Das
Barlum-fest der Gegend Finschhafens,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, ii. (1889) pp. 145-162;
H. Zahn, <q>Die Jabim,</q> in R. Neuhauss's
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi> (Berlin,
1911), iii. 296-298. As to the initiatory
rites among the Bukaua, see S.
Lehner, <q>Bukaua,</q> in R. Neuhauss's
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii. 402-410;
among the Kai, see Ch. Keysser,
<q>Aus dem Kai-Leute,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> pp. 34-40;
among the Tami, see G. Bamler,
<q>Tami,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> pp. 493-507. I have
described the rites of the various tribes
more in detail in <hi rend='italic'>The Belief in Immortality
and the Worship of the Dead</hi>, i. 250-255,
260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In the
Bukaua and Tami tribes the initiation
ceremonies are performed not in the
forest but in a special house built for
the purpose in the village, which the
women are obliged to vacate till the
rites are over.</note>
</p>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
monster
who is
supposed
to swallow
the novices
is apparently
conceived
as a
ghost or
ancestral
spirit.</note>
It is highly significant that all these tribes of New
Guinea apply the same word to the bull-roarer and to the
monster, who is supposed to swallow the novices at circumcision,
and whose fearful roar is represented by the hum of
the harmless wooden instruments. The word in the speech
of the Yabim and Bukaua is <foreign rend='italic'>balum</foreign>; in that of the Kai it
is <foreign rend='italic'>ngosa</foreign>; and in that of the Tami it is <foreign rend='italic'>kani</foreign>. Further, it
deserves to be noted that in three languages out of the four
the same word which is applied to the bull-roarer and to the
monster means also a ghost or spirit of the dead, while in
the fourth language (the Kai) it signifies <q>grandfather.</q>
From this it seems to follow that the being who swallows
and disgorges the novices at initiation is believed to be a
powerful ghost or ancestral spirit, and that the bull-roarer,
which bears his name, is his material representative. That
would explain the jealous secrecy with which the sacred implement
is kept from the sight of women. While they are not
in use, the bull-roarers are stowed away in the men's club-houses,
which no woman may enter; indeed no woman or
uninitiated person may set eyes on a bull-roarer under pain
of death.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Belief in Immortality and the
Worship of the Dead</hi>, i. 250, 251, 255,
261, 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 301. Among the
Bukaua not only does the bull-roarer
bear the general name for a ghost
(<foreign rend='italic'>balum</foreign>), but each particular bull-roarer
bears in addition the name of a particular
dead man, and varies in dignity
and importance with the dignity and
importance of the deceased person
whom it represents. And besides the
big bull-roarers with gruff voices there
are little bull-roarers with shrill voices,
which represent the shrill-voiced wives
of the ancient heroes. See S. Lehner,
<q>Bukaua,</q> in R. Neuhauss's <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch
Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii. 410-412.</note> Similarly among the Tugeri or Kaya-Kaya, a
large Papuan tribe on the south coast of Dutch New
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
Guinea, the name of the bull-roarer, which they call <foreign rend='italic'>sosom</foreign>,
is given to a mythical giant, who is supposed to appear
every year with the south-east monsoon. When he comes,
a festival is held in his honour and bull-roarers are swung.
Boys are presented to the giant, and he kills them, but
considerately brings them to life again.<note place='foot'>R. Pöch, <q>Vierter Bericht über
meine Reise nach Neu-Guinea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Sitzungsberichte
der mathematischen-naturwissenschaftlichen
Klasse der
Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften</hi>
(Vienna), cxv. (1906) Abteilung
i. pp. 901, 902.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The drama
of death
and resurrection
used to be
enacted before
young
men at
initiation in
some parts
of Fiji.</note>
In certain districts of Viti Levu, the largest of the Fijian
Islands, the drama of death and resurrection used to be
acted with much solemnity before the eyes of young men at
initiation. The ceremonies were performed in certain sacred
precincts of oblong shape, enclosed by low walls or rows of
stones but open to the sky. Such a precinct was called a
<foreign rend='italic'>Nanga</foreign>, and it might be described as a temple dedicated to
the worship of ancestors; for in it sacrifices and prayers
were offered to the ancestral spirits. For example, the first-fruits
of the yam harvest were regularly presented with great
ceremony to the souls of the dead in the temple before the
bulk of the crop was dug for the people's use, and no man
might taste of the new yams until this solemn offering had
been made. The yams so offered were piled up in the sacred
enclosure and left to rot there; if any man were so bold as
to eat of these dedicated fruits, it was believed that he would
go mad.<note place='foot'>Rev. Lorimer Fison, <q>The <foreign rend='italic'>Nanga</foreign>
or Sacred Stone Enclosure of Wainimala,
Fiji,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xiv. (1885) p. 27.
The <foreign rend='italic'>Nanga</foreign> or sacred enclosure of
stones, with its sacred rites, was known
only to certain tribes of Fiji (the Nuyaloa,
Vatusila, Mbatiwai, and Mdavutukia),
who inhabited a comparatively
small area, barely a third, of the
island of Viti Levu. As to the institution
in general, see Rev. Lorimer
Fison, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 14-31; A. B.
Joske, <q>The Nanga of Viti-levu,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>,
ii. (1889) pp. 254-266; Basil
Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>The Fijians</hi> (London, 1908),
pp. 146-157. Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Belief in
Immortality and the Worship of the
Dead</hi>, i. 427-438.</note> Any initiated man had the right of approaching
the ancestral spirits at any time in their holy place, where
he would pray to them for help and protection and propitiate
them by laying down his offering of a pig, or yams, or eels,
or cloth, or what not.<note place='foot'>Rev. Lorimer Fison, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
26; Basil Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> 147.</note> Of these offerings perhaps the most
curious was that of the foreskins of young men, who were
circumcised as a sort of vicarious sacrifice or atonement for
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
the recovery of a sick relative, it might be either their father
or one of their father's brothers. The bloody foreskins, stuck
in the cleft of a split reed, were presented to the ancestral
gods in the temple by the chief priest, who prayed for the
sick man's recovery.<note place='foot'>Rev. Lorimer Fison, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 27
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The phrase <q>the ancestral gods</q>
is used by Mr. Fison, one of our best
authorities on Fijian religion. Mr.
Basil Thomson (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 157)
questions the accuracy of Mr. Fison's
account of this vicarious sacrifice on
the ground that every youth was regularly
circumcised as a matter of course.
But there seems to be no inconsistency
between the two statements. While
custom required that every youth should
be circumcised, the exact time for performing
the ceremony need not have
been rigidly prescribed; and if a saving
or atoning virtue was attributed to
the sacrifice of foreskins, it might be
thought desirable in cases of emergency,
such as serious illness, to anticipate it
for the benefit of the sufferer.</note> The temple or sacred enclosure was
divided into two or three compartments by cross walls of
stones, and the inmost of these compartments was the <foreign rend='italic'>Nanga-tambu-tambu</foreign>,
or Holy of Holies.<note place='foot'>According to Mr. Fison, the enclosure
was divided into three compartments;
Mr. Basil Thomson describes
only two, though by speaking
of one of them as the <q>Middle
Nanga</q> he seems to imply that there
were three. The structure was a rough
parallelogram lying east and west,
about a hundred feet long by fifty feet
broad, enclosed by walls or rows of
stone slabs embedded endwise in the
earth. See Basil Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 147 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Description
of the
rite. The mimic
death.
The mimic
resurrection.
The sacramental
meal. The intention
of the
rite.</note>
In these open-air temples of the dead the ceremony of
initiating young men was performed as a rule every year at
the end of October or the beginning of November, which
was the commencement of the Fijian New Year; hence the
novices who were initiated at that season went by the name
of <foreign rend='italic'>Vilavou</foreign> or New Year's Men. The exact time for celebrating
the rite was determined by the flowering of the
<foreign rend='italic'>ndrala</foreign> tree (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Erythrina</foreign>); but it roughly coincided with the
New Year of the Tahitians and Hawaiians, who dated the
commencement of the year by observation of the Pleiades.
The highlanders of Fiji, who alone celebrated these rites, did
not trouble their heads about the stars.<note place='foot'>A. B. Joske, <q>The Nanga of Vitilevu,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>,
ii. (1889) p. 259; Basil
Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>The Fijians</hi>, pp. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
According to Mr. Fison (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 19)
the initiatory ceremonies were held as
a rule only every second year; but he
adds: <q>This period, however, is not
necessarily restricted to two years.
There are always a number of youths
who are growing to the proper age,
and the length of the interval depends
upon the decision of the elders.</q> Perhaps
the seeming discrepancy between
our authorities on this point may be explained
by Mr. Joske's statement (p.
259) that the rites are held in alternate
years by two different sets of men, the
Kai Vesina and the Kai Rukuruku,
both of whom claim to be descended
from the original founders of the rites.
The custom of dating the New Year
by observation of the Pleiades was
apparently universal among the Polynesians.
See <hi rend='italic'>The Spirits of the Corn
and of the Wild</hi>, i. 312 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> As a preparation
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
for the solemnity the heads of the novices were shaved and
their beards, if they had any, were carefully eradicated. On
four successive days they went in procession to the temple
and there deposited in the Holy of Holies their offerings of
cloth and weapons to the ancestral spirits. But on the fifth
and great day of the festival, when they again entered the
sacred ground, they beheld a sight which froze their souls
with horror. Stretched on the ground was a row of dead or
seemingly dead and murdered men, their bodies cut open
and covered with blood, their entrails protruding. At the
further end sat the High Priest, regarding them with a
stony glare, and to reach him the trembling novices had
to crawl on hands and knees over the ghastly blood-bedabbled
corpses that lay between. Having done so they
drew up in a line before him. Suddenly he blurted out a
piercing yell, at which the counterfeit dead men started to
their feet and ran down to the river to cleanse themselves
from the blood and guts of pigs with which they were
beslobbered. The High Priest now unbent his starched
dignity, and skipping from side to side cried in stridulous
tones, <q>Where are the people of my enclosure? Are they
gone to Tonga Levu? Are they gone to the deep sea?</q>
He was soon answered by a deep-mouthed chant, and back
from the river marched the dead men come to life, clean,
fresh, and garlanded, swaying their bodies in time to the
music of their solemn hymn. They took their places in
front of the novices and a religious silence ensued. Such
was the drama of death and resurrection. It was immediately
followed by a sacramental meal. Four old men of
the highest order of initiates now entered the Holy of
Holies. The first bore a cooked yam carefully wrapt up in
leaves so that no part of it should touch the hands of the
bearer: the second carried a piece of baked pork similarly
enveloped: the third held a drinking-cup full of water and
wrapt round with native cloth; and the fourth bore a
napkin of the same stuff. The first elder passed along the
row of novices putting the end of the yam into each of their
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
mouths, and as he did so each of them nibbled a morsel of
the sacred food: the second elder did the same with the
hallowed pork: the third elder followed with the holy
water, with which each novice merely wetted his lips; and
the fourth elder wiped all their mouths with his napkin.
Then the high priest or one of the elders addressed the
young men, warning them solemnly against the sacrilege of
betraying to the profane vulgar any of the high mysteries
which they had witnessed, and threatening all such traitors
with the vengeance of the gods. The general intention of the
initiatory rites seems to have been to introduce the young
men to the worshipful spirits of the dead at their temple,
and to cement the bond between them by a sacramental
meal.<note place='foot'>Rev. Lorimer Fison, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
20-23; A. B. Joske, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 264
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Basil Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>The Fijians</hi>, pp.
150-153. The sacramental character
of the meal is recognized by Mr. Fison,
who says (p. 23) that after the performance
of the rites the novices <q>are
now <foreign rend='italic'>Vīlavóu</foreign>, accepted members of the
<foreign rend='italic'>Nanga</foreign>, qualified to take their place
among the men of the community,
though still only on probation. As
children&mdash;their childhood being indicated
by their shaven heads&mdash;they
were presented to the ancestors, and
their acceptance was notified by what
(looking at the matter from the
natives' standpoint) we might, without
irreverance, almost call the <emph>sacrament</emph>
of food and water, too sacred even for
the elders' hands to touch.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Initiatory
rite in the
island of
Rook:
pretence
that the
novices are
swallowed
by the
devil.
Secret
society of
the Duk-duk
in New
Britain. Novices
supposed
to be killed.
The new
birth.</note>
The people of Rook, an island between New Guinea and
New Britain, hold festivals at which one or two disguised men,
their heads covered with wooden masks, go dancing through
the village, followed by all the other men. They demand
that the circumcised boys who have not yet been swallowed
by Marsaba (the devil) shall be given up to them. The
boys, trembling and shrieking, are delivered to them, and
must creep between the legs of the disguised men. Then
the procession moves through the village again, and
announces that Marsaba has eaten up the boys, and will
not disgorge them till he receives a present of pigs, taro,
and so forth. So all the villagers, according to their means,
contribute provisions, which are then consumed in the name
of Marsaba.<note place='foot'>Paul Reina, <q>Ueber die Bewohner
der Insel Rook,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
allgemeine Erdkunde</hi>, N.F., iv. (1858)
pp. 356 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In New Britain all males are members of an
association called the Duk-duk. The boys are admitted to
it very young, but are not fully initiated till their fourteenth
year, when they receive from the Tubuvan or Tubuan a
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
terrible blow with a cane, which is supposed to kill them.
The Tubuan and the Duk-duk are two disguised men who
represent cassowaries. They dance with a short hopping
step in imitation of the cassowary. Each of them wears a
huge hat like an extinguisher, woven of grass or palm-fibres;
it is six feet high, and descends to the wearer's
shoulders, completely concealing his head and face. From
the neck to the knees the man's body is hidden by a crinoline
made of the leaves of a certain tree fastened on hoops,
one above the other. The Tubuan is regarded as a female,
the Duk-duk as a male. The former is supposed to breed
and give birth to the novices, who are accordingly looked
upon as newly born. The female masks are very plain
compared with the male masks. Two of them are regularly
kept from year to year in order that they may annually
breed new Duk-duks. When they are wanted for this purpose
they are brought forth, decorated afresh, and provided with
new leaf dresses to match. According to one account, women
and children may not look upon one of these disguised men
or they would die. So strong is this superstition among
them that they will run away and hide as soon as they hear
him coming, for they are aware of his approach through a
peculiar shrieking noise he utters as he goes along. In the
district of Berara, where red is the Duk-duk colour, the mere
sight of a red cloth is enough to make the women take to
their heels. The common herd are not allowed to know
who the masker is. If he stumbles and his hat falls to the
ground, disclosing his face, or his crinoline is torn to tatters
by the bushes, his attendants immediately surround him to
hide his person from the vulgar eye. According to one
writer, indeed, the performer who drops his mask, or lets it
fall so that the sharp point at the top sticks in the ground,
is put to death. The institution of the Duk-duk is common
to the neighbouring islands of New Ireland and the Duke
of York.<note place='foot'>R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Im Bismarck
Archipel</hi> (Leipsic, 1887), pp. 129-134;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</hi>
(Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 567 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Rev.
G. Brown, <q>Notes on the Duke of
York Group, New Britain, and New
Ireland,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Geographical
Society</hi>, xlvii. (1878) pp. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
H. H. Romilly, <q>The Islands of the
New Britain Group,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of
the Royal Geographical Society</hi>, N.S.,
ix. (1887) pp. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Rev. G. Brown,
<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 17; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Melanesians and Polynesians</hi>
(London, 1910), pp. 60 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
W. Powell, <hi rend='italic'>Wanderings in a Wild
Country</hi> (London, 1883), pp. 60-66;
C. Hager, <hi rend='italic'>Kaiser Wilhelm's Land und
der Bismarck Archipel</hi> (Leipsic, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>),
pp. 115-128; Hubner, quoted by W.
H. Dall, <q>On masks, labrets, and
certain aboriginal customs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Third
Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1884), p. 100;
P. A. Kleintitschen, <hi rend='italic'>Die Küstenbewohner
der Gazellehalbinsel</hi> (Hiltrup bei
Münster, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 350 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H.
Schurtz, <hi rend='italic'>Altersklassen und Männerbünde</hi>
(Berlin, 1902), pp. 369-377.
The inhabitants of these islands are
divided into two exogamous classes,
which in the Duke of York Island have
two insects for their totems. One of
the insects is the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mantis religiosus</foreign>; the
other is an insect that mimics the leaf
of the horse-chestnut tree very closely.
See Rev. B. Danks, <q>Marriage Customs
of the New Britain Group,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xviii.
(1889) pp. 281 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and
Exogamy</hi>, ii. 118 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Initiatory
rite in
Halmahera:
pretence
of
begetting
the novices
anew.</note>
Among the Galelareese and Tobelorese of Halmahera,
an island to the west of New Guinea, boys go through a form
of initiation, part of which seems to consist in a pretence of
begetting them anew. When a number of boys have reached
the proper age, their parents agree to celebrate the ceremony
at their common expense, and they invite others to be present
at it. A shed is erected, and two long tables are placed in
it, with benches to match, one for the men and one for the
women. When all the preparations have been made for a
feast, a great many skins of the rayfish, and some pieces of
a wood which imparts a red colour to water, are taken to the
shed. A priest or elder causes a vessel to be placed in the
sight of all the people, and then begins, with significant
gestures, to rub a piece of the wood with the ray-skin. The
powder so produced is put in the vessel, and at the same
time the name of one of the boys is called out. The same
proceeding is repeated for each boy. Then the vessels are
filled with water, after which the feast begins. At the third
cock-crow the priest smears the faces and bodies of the boys
with the red water, which represents the blood shed at the
perforation of the <emph>hymen</emph>. Towards daybreak the boys are
taken to the wood, and must hide behind the largest trees.
The men, armed with sword and shield, accompany them,
dancing and singing. The priest knocks thrice on each of
the trees behind which a boy is hiding. All day the boys
stay in the wood, exposing themselves to the heat of the sun
as much as possible. In the evening they bathe and return
to the shed, where the women supply them with food.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <q>Galela und
Tobeloresen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>,
xvii. (1885) pp. 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Kakian
association
in Ceram.
The rite of
initiation:
pretence of
killing the
novices.</note>
In the west of Ceram boys at puberty are admitted to
the Kakian association.<note place='foot'>The Kakian association and its
initiatory ceremonies have often been
described. See François Valentyn,
<hi rend='italic'>Oud en nieuw Oost-Indiën</hi> (Dordrecht
and Amsterdam, 1724-1726), iii. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Von Schmid, <q>Het Kakihansch Verbond
op het eiland Ceram,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Neérlands Indië</hi> (Batavia, 1843),
dl. ii. pp. 25-38; A. van Ekris, <q>Het
Ceramsche Kakianverbond,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
ix. (1865) pp. 205-226
(repeated with slight changes in
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xvi. (1867) pp. 290-315);
P. Fournier, <q>De Zuidkust van
Ceram,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xvi.
(1867) pp. 154-156; W. A. van Rees,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Pionniers der Beschaving in
Neêrlands Indië</hi> (Arnheim, 1867),
pp. 92-106; G. W. W. C. Baron
van Hoëvell, <hi rend='italic'>Ambon en meer bepaaldelijk
de Oeliasers</hi> (Dordrecht, 1875),
pp. 153 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Schulze, <q>Ueber Ceram
und seine Bewohner,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</hi>
(1877), p. 117; W. Joest, <q>Beiträge
zur Kenntniss der Eingebornen der
Insel Formosa und Ceram,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>
(1882) p. 64; H. von Rosenberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Der Malayische Archipel</hi> (Leipsic,
1878), p. 318; A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Indonesien</hi>,
i. (Berlin, 1884) pp. 145-148;
J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>
(The Hague, 1886), pp. 107-111;
O. D. Tauern, <q>Ceram,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, xlv. (1913) pp. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
The best accounts are those of Valentyn,
Von Schmid, Van Ekris, Van Rees,
and Riedel, which are accordingly followed
in the text.</note> Modern writers have commonly
regarded this association as primarily a political league instituted
to resist foreign domination. In reality its objects
are purely religious and social, though it is possible that the
priests may have occasionally used their powerful influence
for political ends. The society is in fact merely one of those
widely-diffused primitive institutions, of which a chief object
is the initiation of young men. In recent years the true
nature of the association has been duly recognized by the
distinguished Dutch ethnologist, J. G. F. Riedel. The Kakian
house is an oblong wooden shed, situated under the darkest
trees in the depth of the forest, and is built to admit so little
light that it is impossible to see what goes on in it. Every
village has such a house. Thither the boys who are to be
initiated are conducted blindfold, followed by their parents
and relations. Each boy is led by the hand by two men,
who act as his sponsors or guardians, looking after him
during the period of initiation. When all are assembled
before the shed, the high priest calls aloud upon the devils.
Immediately a hideous uproar is heard to proceed from the
shed. It is made by men with bamboo trumpets, who have
been secretly introduced into the building by a back door,
but the women and children think it is made by the devils,
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
and are much terrified. Then the priests enter the shed,
followed by the boys, one at a time. As soon as each boy
has disappeared within the precincts, a dull chopping sound
is heard, a fearful cry rings out, and a sword or spear, dripping
with blood, is thrust through the roof of the shed. This is a
token that the boy's head has been cut off, and that the devil
has carried him away to the other world, there to regenerate
and transform him. So at sight of the bloody sword the
mothers weep and wail, crying that the devil has murdered
their children. In some places, it would seem, the boys are
pushed through an opening made in the shape of a crocodile's
jaws or a cassowary's beak, and it is then said that the devil
has swallowed them. The boys remain in the shed for five
or nine days. Sitting in the dark, they hear the blast of the
bamboo trumpets, and from time to time the sound of musket
shots and the clash of swords. Every day they bathe, and
their faces and bodies are smeared with a yellow dye, to give
them the appearance of having been swallowed by the devil.
During his stay in the Kakian house each boy has one
or two crosses tattooed with thorns on his breast or arm.
When they are not sleeping, the lads must sit in a crouching
posture without moving a muscle. As they sit in a row
cross-legged, with their hands stretched out, the chief takes
his trumpet, and placing the mouth of it on the hands of
each lad, speaks through it in strange tones, imitating the
voice of the spirits. He warns the lads, under pain of death,
to observe the rules of the Kakian society, and never to
reveal what has passed in the Kakian house. The novices
are also told by the priests to behave well to their blood
relations, and are taught the traditions and secrets of the
tribe.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The resurrection
of
the novices.</note>
Meantime the mothers and sisters of the lads have gone
home to weep and mourn. But in a day or two the men
who acted as guardians or sponsors to the novices return
to the village with the glad tidings that the devil, at the
intercession of the priests, has restored the lads to life. The
men who bring this news come in a fainting state and
daubed with mud, like messengers freshly arrived from the
nether world. Before leaving the Kakian house, each lad
receives from the priest a stick adorned at both ends with
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
cock's or cassowary's feathers. The sticks are supposed to
have been given to the lads by the devil at the time when he
restored them to life, and they serve as a token that the youths
have been in the spirit land. When they return to their
homes they totter in their walk, and enter the house backward,
as if they had forgotten how to walk properly; or they
enter the house by the back door. If a plate of food is given
to them, they hold it upside down. They remain dumb,
indicating their wants by signs only. All this is to shew
that they are still under the influence of the devil or the
spirits. Their sponsors have to teach them all the common
acts of life, as if they were new-born children. Further,
upon leaving the Kakian house the boys are strictly forbidden
to eat of certain fruits until the next celebration of
the rites has taken place. And for twenty or thirty days
their hair may not be combed by their mothers or sisters.
At the end of that time the high priest takes them to a
lonely place in the forest, and cuts off a lock of hair from the
crown of each of their heads. After these initiatory rites the
lads are deemed men, and may marry; it would be a scandal
if they married before.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The secret
society of
<foreign rend='italic'>Ndembo</foreign>
in the
valley of
the Lowe
Congo.</note>
In the region of the Lower Congo a simulation of death
and resurrection is, or rather used to be, practised by the
members of a guild or secret society called <foreign rend='italic'>ndembo</foreign>. The
society had nothing to do with puberty or circumcision,
though the custom of circumcision is common in the country.
Young people and adults of both sexes might join the
guild; after initiation they were called <q>the Knowing
Ones</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>nganga</foreign>). To found a branch of the society it was
necessary to have an albino, who, whether a child, lad, or
adult, was the acknowledged head of the society.<note place='foot'>No reason is assigned for this
curious choice of a president. Can
it have been that, because negro children
are born pale or nearly white,
an albino was deemed a proper president
for a society, all the initiated
members of which claimed to have
been born again? Speaking of the
people of the Lower Congo the old
English traveller Andrew Battel observes
that <q>the children of this
country are born white, but change
their colour in two days' time to
a perfect black</q> (<q>Adventures of
Andrew Battel,</q> in J. Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, xvi. London,
1814, p. 331).</note> The
ostensible reason for starting a branch of the guild in a
district was commonly an epidemic of sickness, <q>and the
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
idea was to go into <foreign rend='italic'>ndembo</foreign> to die, and after an indefinite
period, from a few months to two or three years, to be
resurrected with a new body not liable to the sickness then
troubling the countryside. Another reason for starting a
<foreign rend='italic'>ndembo</foreign> was a dearth of children in a district. It was
believed that good luck in having children would attend
those who entered or died <foreign rend='italic'>ndembo</foreign>. But the underlying
idea was the same, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> to get a <q>new body</q> that would be
healthy and perform its functions properly.</q> The quarters
of the society were always a stockaded enclosure in a great
thick forest; a gate of planks painted yellow and red gave
access to it, and within there was an assemblage of huts.
The place was fenced to keep intruders from prying into
the mysteries of the guild, and it was near water. Uninitiated
persons might walk on the public roads through
the forest, but if they were caught in bye-paths or hunting
in the woods, they were flogged, fined, and sometimes killed.
They might not even look upon the persons of those who
had <q>died <foreign rend='italic'>ndembo</foreign></q>; hence when these sanctified persons
were roving about the forest or going to the river, the booming
notes of a drum warned the profane vulgar to keep out
of their way.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Pretence of
death as a
preliminary
to resurrection.</note>
When the stockade and the huts in the forest were
ready to receive all who wished to put off the old man or
woman and to put on the new, one of the initiates gave
the sign and the aspirant after the higher life dropped down
like dead in some public place, it might be the market or
the centre of the town where there were plenty of people to
witness the edifying spectacle. The initiates immediately
spread a pall over him or her, beat the earth round about
the pretended corpse with plantain stalks, chanted incantations,
fired guns, and cut capers. Then they carried the
seemingly dead body away into the forest and disappeared
with it into the stockade. The spectacle proved infectious;
one after another in the emotional, excitable crowd of negroes
followed the example, dropped down like dead, and were
carried off, sometimes in a real cataleptic state. In this
way fifty to a hundred or more novices might feign death
and be transported into the sacred enclosure. There they
were supposed not only to die but to rot till only a single
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
bone of their body remained, of which the initiated had to
take the greatest care in expectation of the joyful resurrection
that was soon to follow. However, though they were both
dead and rotten, they consumed a large quantity of food,
which their credulous relatives brought to them in baskets,
toiling with the loads on their backs over the long paths
through the forest in the sweltering heat of the tropical
day. If the relations failed to discharge this pious and
indispensable duty, their kinsman in the sacred enclosure ran
a risk of dying in good earnest, or rather of being spirited
away to a distant town and sold as a slave.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Seclusion
of the
novices.</note>
Shut up within the stockade for months or years, the men
and women, boys and girls, dispensed with the superfluity of
clothes, rubbed their naked bodies with red ochre or powdered
camwood instead, and gave themselves up to orgies of unbridled
lust. Some feeble attempts were made to teach them
the rudiments of a secret language, but the vocabulary was
small and its principles lacking in ingenuity. The time during
which this seclusion lasted might vary from three months
to three years. When the circumstances which had furnished
the pretext for instituting the society had passed away,
whether it was that the epidemic had died out or that the
birth-rate had sensibly increased, murmurs would begin to
be heard among friends and relatives in the town, who did
not see why they should be taxed any longer to support a
set of idle and dissolute ruffians in the forest, and why they
should trudge day after day in the sweat of their brow to
carry provisions to them. So the supplies would begin to
run short, and whenever that happened the mystery of the
resurrection was sure to follow very soon after.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Resurrection
of the
novices. Pretence
of the
novices
that they
have forgotten
everything.</note>
Accordingly it would be announced that on a certain
market-day the new initiates, now raised from the dead, would
reveal themselves in all their glory to the astonished gaze of the
public. The glad tidings were received with enthusiasm, and
crowds assembled from all the country round about to welcome
those who had come back from the world beyond the grave.
When all were gathered in eager expectancy in the market-place,
the sounds of distant music would be heard, and soon
the gay procession would defile into the open square and
march round it, while the dusky skins, reddened with camwood
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
powder, glistened in the sunshine, the gay garments
fluttered in the wind, and the tassels of palm-leaf fibre
dangled at every arm. In the crowd of spectators many
parents would recognize their children in the marching
figures of the procession, and girls and boys would point
out their brothers and sisters and eagerly call out their
names. But in the stolid faces of the initiates not an eye
would gleam with recognition, not a muscle would twitch
with an involuntary expression of delight; for having just
been raised from the dead they were supposed to know
nothing of their former life, of friends and relations, of home
and country. There might be in the crowd a mother or a
sister not seen for years; or, more moving still, the novice
might look in vain for loved and remembered faces that
would never be seen in the market-place again. But whatever
his feelings might be, he must rigidly suppress them
under pain of a flogging, a fine, or even death. At last the
parade was over and the procession broke up. Then the
old hands introduced the new hands to their own parents
and brothers and sisters, to their old homes and haunts.
For still the novices kept up the pretence that everything
was new and strange to them, that they could not speak
their mother tongue, that they did not know their own
fathers and mothers, their own town and their own houses;
nay that they had forgotten even how to eat their food. So
everything and everybody had to be shewn to them and
their names and meanings explained. Their guides would
lead them about the town, pointing out the various roads
and telling where they led to&mdash;this one to the watering-place
on the river, this to the forest, that to the farms, and
so on: they would take up the commonest domestic utensils
and shew what they were used for: they would even chew
the food and put it into the mouths of the novices, like
mother birds feeding their callow young. For some time
afterwards the resuscitated persons, attended by their mentors,
would go about the town and the neighbourhood acting in a
strange way like children or mad folk, seizing what they
wanted and trying to beat or even kill such as dared to
refuse them anything. Their guardian would generally
restrain these sallies; but sometimes he would arrange with
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
his hopeful pupils to be out of sight when two or three of
them clubbed together to assault and rob an honest man,
and would only return in time to share the booty. After
a while, however, the excitement created by the resurrection
would wear off; the dead folk come to life were expected
to have learned their lessons, and if they forgot themselves,
their memory was promptly refreshed by the law.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. H. Weeks, <q>Notes on
some Customs of the Lower Congo
People,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xx. (1909) pp.
189-198; Rev. W. H. Bentley, <hi rend='italic'>Life
on the Congo</hi> (London, 1887), pp.
78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering on the Congo</hi>
(London, 1900), i. 284-287. Mr.
Weeks's description of the institution
is the fullest and I have followed it
in the text. The custom was in vogue
down to recent years, but seems to
have been suppressed chiefly by the
exertions of the missionaries. Besides
the <foreign rend='italic'>ndembo</foreign> guild there is, or was, in
these regions another secret society
known as the <foreign rend='italic'>nkimba</foreign>, which some
writers have confused with the <foreign rend='italic'>ndembo</foreign>.
The <foreign rend='italic'>nkimba</foreign> was of a more harmless
character than the other; indeed it
seems even to have served some useful
purposes, partly as a kind of freemasonry
which encouraged mutual
help among its members, partly as a
system of police for the repression of
crime, its professed object being to put
down witchcraft and punish witches.
Only males were admitted to it. Candidates
for initiation were stupefied by
a drug, but there was apparently no
pretence of killing them and bringing
them to life again. Members of the
society had a home in the jungle away
from the town, where the novices lived
together for a period varying from six
months to two years. They learned a
secret language, and received new
names; it was afterwards an offence
to call a man by the name of his childhood.
Instead of the red dye affected
by members of the <foreign rend='italic'>ndembo</foreign> guild,
members of the <foreign rend='italic'>nkimba</foreign> guild whitened
their bodies with pipe clay and wore
crinolines of palm frondlets. See
Rev. W. H. Bentley, <hi rend='italic'>Life on the
Congo</hi>, pp. 80-83; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering on
the Congo</hi>, i. 282-284; Rev. J. H.
Weeks, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 198-201; (Sir)
H. H. Johnston, <q>A Visit to Mr.
Stanley's Stations on the River Congo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal Geographical
Society</hi>, N. S. v. (1883) pp.
572 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Delmar Morgan, <q>Notes
on the Lower Congo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, N.S. vi.
(1884) p. 193. As to these two secret
societies on the Lower Congo, see
further (Sir) H. H. Johnston, <q>On
the Races of the Congo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xiii.
(1884) pp. 472 sq.; É. Dupont, <hi rend='italic'>Lettres
sur le Congo</hi> (Paris, 1889), pp. 96-100;
Herbert Ward, <hi rend='italic'>Five Years with
the Congo Cannibals</hi> (London, 1890),
pp. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> <q>Ethnographical
Notes relating to the Congo Tribes,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxiv. (1895) pp. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. J.
Glave, <hi rend='italic'>Six Years of Adventure in
Congo Land</hi> (London, 1893), pp. 80-83;
L. Frobenius, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masken und
Geheimbünde Afrikas</hi> (Halle, 1898),
pp. 43-54 (<hi rend='italic'>Nova Acta. Abh. der
Kaiserl. Leop. Carol. Deutschen Akademie
der Naturforscher</hi>, vol. lxxiv.
No. 1); H. Schurtz, <hi rend='italic'>Altersklassen
und Männerbünde</hi> (Berlin, 1902), pp.
433-437; <hi rend='italic'>Notes Annalytiques sur les
Collections Ethnographiques du Musée
du Congo</hi> (Brussels, 1902-1906), pp.
199-206; Ed. de Jonghe, <hi rend='italic'>Les Sociétés
Secrètes au Bas-Congo</hi> (Brussels, 1907),
pp. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (extract from the <hi rend='italic'>Revue
des Questions Scientifiques</hi>, October
1907). Some of these writers do not
discriminate between the two societies,
the <foreign rend='italic'>ndembo</foreign> and the <foreign rend='italic'>nkimba</foreign>. According
to our best authorities (Messrs.
Bentley and Weeks) the two societies
are quite distinct and neither of them
has anything to do with circumcision,
which is, however, prevalent in the
region. See Rev. J. H. Weeks,
<q>Notes on some Customs of the
Lower Congo People,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xx.
(1909) pp. 304 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> A secret society
of the Lower Congo which Adolf
Bastian has described under the
name of <foreign rend='italic'>quimba</foreign> is probably identical
with the <foreign rend='italic'>nkimba</foreign>. He speaks of a
<q>Secret Order of those who have
been born again,</q> and tells us that the
candidates <q>are thrown into a death-like
state and buried in the fetish
house. When they are wakened to
life again, they have (as in the Belliparo)
lost their memory of everything
that is past, even of their father and
mother, and they can no longer remember
their own name. Hence new
names are given them according to
the titles or ranks to which they are
advanced.</q> See A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die
deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</hi>
(Jena, 1874-1875), ii. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bastian's
account of
the ritual
of death
and resurrection
in
West
Africa.</note>
The following account of the rites, as practised in this
part of Africa, was given to Adolf Bastian by an interpreter.
<q>The great fetish lives in the interior of the forest-land,
where nobody sees him and nobody can see him. When he
dies, the fetish priests carefully collect his bones in order to
bring them to life again, and they nourish them, that he may
be clothed anew in flesh and blood. But it is not good to
speak of it. In the land of Ambamba every one must die
once, and when the fetish priest shakes his calabash against
a village, all the men and lads whose hour is come fall into
a state of lifeless torpidity, from which they generally arise
after three days. But if the fetish loves a man he carries
him away into the bush and buries him in the fetish house,
often for many years. When he comes to life again, he
begins to eat and drink as before, but his understanding is
gone and the fetish man must teach him and direct him in
every motion, like the smallest child. At first this can only
be done with a stick, but gradually his senses return, so that
it is possible to talk with him, and when his education is
complete, the priest brings him back to his parents. They
would seldom recognize their son but for the express assurances
of the fetish priest, who moreover recalls previous
events to their memory. He who has not gone through the
ceremony of the new birth in Ambamba is universally looked
down upon and is not admitted to the dances.</q><note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Ein Besuch in San
Salvador</hi> (Bremen, 1859), pp. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Acquisition
of a patron
animal or
guardian
spirit in a
dream.</note>
In the same part of Africa we hear of a fetish called
Malassi, the votaries of which form a secret order of the
usual sort with a variety of ranks to which the initiates are
promoted. <q>The candidate is plunged into a magic sleep
within the temple-hut, and while he sleeps he beholds a bird
or other object with which his existence is henceforth
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
sympathetically bound up, just as the life of the young
Indian is bound up with the animal which he sees in his
dream at puberty. All who have been born again at
initiation, after their return to a normal state, bear the name
of Swamie (a sacred designation also in India) or, if they are
women, Sumbo (Tembo), and wear as a token the ring called
<foreign rend='italic'>sase</foreign>, which consists of an iron hoop with a fruit attached to
it.</q><note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, ii. 183.
Elsewhere Bastian says that about San
Salvador lads at puberty are secluded
in the forest and circumcised, and
during their seclusion <q>each of them is
mystically united to the fetish by which
his life is henceforth determined, as the
Brahman whispers the secret charm in
the ear of him who has been born
again.</q> See A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Ein Besuch
in San Salvador</hi> (Bremen, 1859), pp.
85 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly among the Fans of the Gaboon a young
warrior acquires his guardian spirit by dreaming. He is
secluded in the forest, drinks a fermented and intoxicating
liquor, and smokes hemp. Then he falls into a heavy sleep,
and next morning he must describe exactly to the fetish
priest the animal, tree, mineral, or whatever it may have
been which he saw in his dream. This magical dream is
repeated on three successive nights; and after that the young
man is sent forth by the priest to seek and bring back the
beast, bird, reptile, or whatever it was of which he dreamed.
The youth obeys, reduces the animal or thing to cinders or
ashes, and preserves these calcined remains as a talisman
which will protect him against many dangers.<note place='foot'>H. Trilles, <hi rend='italic'>Le Totémisme chez les
Fâṅ</hi> (Münster i. W., 1912), pp. 479 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
The writer speaks of the guardian
spirit as the individual totem of the
young warrior.</note> However,
in these rites there is no clear simulation of dying and coming
to life again.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dapper's
account of
the ritual
of death
and resurrection
in
the Belli-Paaro
society.</note>
Rites of death and resurrection were formerly observed in
Quoja, on the west coast of Africa, to the north of the Congo.
They are thus described by an old writer:&mdash;<q>They have
another ceremony which they call Belli-Paaro, but it is not for
everybody. For it is an incorporation in the assembly of
the spirits, and confers the right of entering their groves,
that is to say, of going and eating the offerings which the
simple folk bring thither. The initiation or admission to
the Belli-Paaro is celebrated every twenty or twenty-five
years. The initiated recount marvels of the ceremony,
saying that they are roasted, that they entirely change their
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
habits and life, and that they receive a spirit quite different
from that of other people and quite new lights. The badge
of membership consists in some lines traced on the neck
between the shoulders; the lines seem to be pricked with a
needle. Those who have this mark pass for persons of
spirit, and when they have attained a certain age they are
allowed a voice in all public assemblies; whereas the
uninitiated are regarded as profane, impure, and ignorant
persons, who dare not express an opinion on any subject of
importance. When the time for the ceremony has come, it
is celebrated as follows. By order of the king a place is
appointed in the forest, whither they bring the youths who
have not been marked, not without much crying and weeping;
for it is impressed upon the youths that in order to
undergo this change it is necessary to suffer death. So they
dispose of their property, as if it were all over with them.
There are always some of the initiated beside the novices to
instruct them. They teach them to dance a certain dance
called <foreign rend='italic'>killing</foreign>, and to sing verses in praise of Belli. Above
all, they are very careful not to let them die of hunger,
because if they did so, it is much to be feared that the
spiritual resurrection would profit them nothing. This
manner of life lasts five or six years, and is comfortable
enough, for there is a village in the forest, and they amuse
themselves with hunting and fishing. Other lads are brought
thither from time to time, so that the last comers have not
long to stay. No woman or uninitiated person is suffered
to pass within four or five leagues of the sacred wood.
When their instruction is completed, they are taken from the
wood and shut up in small huts made for the purpose. Here
they begin once more to hold communion with mankind and
to talk with the women who bring them their food. It is
amusing to see their affected simplicity. They pretend to
know no one, and to be ignorant of all the customs of the
country, such as the customs of washing themselves, rubbing
themselves with oil, and so forth. When they enter these huts,
their bodies are all covered with the feathers of birds, and
they wear caps of bark which hang down before their faces.
But after a time they are dressed in clothes and taken to a
great open place, where all the people of the neighbourhood
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
are assembled. Here the novices give the first proof of their
capacity by dancing a dance which is called the dance of Belli.
After the dance is over, the novices are taken to the houses
of their parents by their instructors.</q><note place='foot'>O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1686), pp. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Dapper's account has been abridged
in the text.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Miss
Kingsley
on the rites
of initiation
into secret
societies
in West
Africa.</note>
Miss Kingsley informs us that <q>the great point of
agreement between all these West African secret societies
lies in the methods of initiation. The boy, if he belongs
to a tribe that goes in for tattooing, is tattooed, and is
handed over to instructors in the societies' secrets and
formulae. He lives, with the other boys of his tribe
undergoing initiation, usually under the rule of several instructors,
and for the space of one year. He lives always
in the forest, and is naked and smeared with clay. The
boys are exercised so as to become inured to hardship; in
some districts, they make raids so as to perfect themselves in
this useful accomplishment. They always take a new name,
and are supposed by the initiation process to become new
beings in the magic wood, and on their return to their village
at the end of their course, they pretend to have entirely
forgotten their life before they entered the wood; but this
pretence is not kept up beyond the period of festivities given
to welcome them home. They all learn, to a certain extent,
a new language, a secret language only understood by the
initiated. The same removal from home and instruction
from initiated members is observed also with the girls.
However, in their case, it is not always a forest-grove they
are secluded in, sometimes it is done in huts. Among the
Grain Coast tribes, however, the girls go into a magic wood
until they are married. Should they have to leave the wood
for any temporary reason, they must smear themselves with
white clay. A similar custom holds good in Okÿon, Calabar
district, where, should a girl have to leave the fattening-house,
she must be covered with white clay.</q><note place='foot'>Miss Mary H. Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in West Africa</hi> (London, 1867), p.
531. Perhaps the smearing with clay
may be intended to indicate that the
novices have undergone the new birth;
for the negro child, though born
reddish-brown, soon turns slaty-grey
(E. B. Tylor, <hi rend='italic'>Anthropology</hi>, London,
1881, p. 67), which would answer well
enough to the hue of the clay-bedaubed
novices.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The <foreign rend='italic'>purra</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>poro</foreign>,
a secret
society
of Sierra
Leone. The new
birth.
The <foreign rend='italic'>semo</foreign>,
a secret
society
of Senegambia. Death and
resurrection
at
initiation.</note>
Among the natives of the Sherbro, an island lying close
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
to the coast of Sierra Leone, there is a secret society called
the <foreign rend='italic'>purra</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>poro</foreign>, <q>which is partly of a religious, but chiefly
of a political nature. It resembles free-masonry in excluding
females, and in obliging every member by a solemn oath,
which I believe is seldom violated, not to divulge the sacred
mysteries, and to yield a prompt and implicit obedience to
every order of their superiors. Boys of seven or eight years
of age are admitted, or rather serve a novitiate until they
arrive at a proper age; for it is difficult to procure exact
information, and even somewhat dangerous to make many
inquiries. Every person on entering the society lays aside
his former name and assumes a new one; to call him by his
old name would produce a dispute. They have a superior
or head <foreign rend='italic'>purra</foreign> man, assisted by a grand council, whose
commands are received with the most profound reverence
and absolute submission, both by the subordinate councils
and by individuals. Their meetings are held in the most
retired spots, amid the gloom of night, and carried on with
inquisitorial secrecy. When the <foreign rend='italic'>purra</foreign> comes into a town,
which is always at night, it is accompanied with the most
dreadful howlings, screams, and other horrid noises. The
inhabitants, who are not members of the society, are obliged
to secure themselves within doors; should any one be
discovered without, or attempting to peep at what is going
forward, he would inevitably be put to death. To restrain
the curiosity of the females, they are ordered to continue
within doors, clapping their hands incessantly, so long as the
<foreign rend='italic'>purra</foreign> remains. Like the secret tribunal, which formerly
existed in Germany, it takes cognizance of offences,
particularly of witchcraft and murder, but above all of
contumacy and disobedience in any of its own members, and
punishes the guilty with death in so secret and sudden a
manner, that the perpetrators are never known: indeed, such
is the dread created by this institution, that they are never
even inquired after.</q><note place='foot'>Thomas Winterbottom, <hi rend='italic'>An Account
of the Native Africans in the
Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone</hi> (London,
1803), pp. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare
John Matthews, <hi rend='italic'>A Voyage to the River
Sierra-Leone</hi> (London, 1791), pp. 82-85;
J. B. L. Durand, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage au
Sénégal</hi> (Paris, 1802), pp. 183 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(whose account is copied without
acknowledgment from Matthews).
The <foreign rend='italic'>purra</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>poro</foreign> society also exists
among the Timmes of Sierra Leone;
in this tribe the novices are sometimes
secluded from their families for ten
years in the wood, they are tattooed on
their backs and arms, and they learn
a language which consists chiefly of
names of plants and animals used in
special senses. Women are not admitted
to the society. See Zweifel et
Moustier, <q>Voyage aux sources du
Niger,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</hi>
(Paris), VI. Série, xv. (1878)
pp. 108 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When the members of the <foreign rend='italic'>purra</foreign> or
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
<foreign rend='italic'>poro</foreign> society visit a town, the leader of the troop, whom an
English writer calls <q>the Poro devil,</q> draws discordant notes
from a sort of reed flute, the holes of which are covered with
spiders' webs. The only time when this devil and his rout
make a prolonged stay in the town is on the evening before
the day on which the newly initiated lads are to be brought
back from the forest. Then the leader and his satellites
parade the streets for hours, while all the uninitiated men,
women, and children remain shut up in their houses, listening
to the doleful strains of the flute, which signify that the devil
is suffering the pangs of childbirth before he brings forth the
initiated lads; for he is supposed to have been pregnant
with them the whole of the rainy season ever since they
entered into the forest. When they come forth from the
wood, they wear four or five coils of twisted ferns round their
waists in token of their being initiated members of the order.<note place='foot'>T. J. Alldridge, <hi rend='italic'>The Sherbro and
its Hinterland</hi> (London, 1901), p. 130.
This work contains a comparatively
full account of the <foreign rend='italic'>purra</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>poro</foreign> society
(pp. 124-131) and of the other secret
societies of the country (pp. 131-149,
153-159). Compare L. Frobenius,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Masken und Geheimbünde Afrikas</hi>
(Halle, 1898), pp. 138-144 (<hi rend='italic'>Nova
Acta, Abh. der Kaiserl. Leop.-Carol.
Deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher</hi>,
vol. lxxiv. No. 1).</note>
Among the Soosoos of Senegambia there is a similar secret
society called <foreign rend='italic'>semo</foreign>: <q>the natives who speak English call it
African masonry. As the whole ceremonies are kept very
private, it is difficult to discover in what they consist: but
it is said that the novices are met in the woods by the
old men, who cut marks on several parts of their bodies,
but most commonly on the belly; they are also taught a
language peculiar to the <foreign rend='italic'>semo</foreign>, and swear dreadful oaths
never to divulge the secrets revealed to them. The young
men are then made to live in the woods for twelve months,
and are supposed to be at liberty to kill any one who
approaches and does not understand the language of the
<foreign rend='italic'>semo</foreign>.... It is said, when women are so unfortunate as to
intrude upon the <foreign rend='italic'>semo</foreign>, they kill them, cut off their breasts,
and hang them up by the side of the paths as a warning
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
to others. This circumstance is perhaps less deserving of
credit, because the Soosoos are fond of telling wonderful and
horrid stories respecting this institution. They say, for
instance, that when first initiated their throats are cut, and
they continue dead for some time; at length they are
reanimated and initiated into the mysteries of the institution,
and are enabled to ramble about with much more vigour
than they possessed before.</q><note place='foot'>Thomas Winterbottom, <hi rend='italic'>An Account
of the Native Africans in the
Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone</hi> (London,
1803), pp. 137-139. As to the
<foreign rend='italic'>semo</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>simo</foreign> society see further L.
Frobenius, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 130-138.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ritual
of the
new birth
among the
Akikuyu
of British
East
Africa.</note>
While the belief or the pretence of death and resurrection
at initiation is common among the negroes of West Africa,
few traces of it appear to be found among the tribes in the
southern, central, and eastern parts of that continent; and it
is notable that in these regions secret societies, which flourish
in the West, are also conspicuously absent. However, the
Akikuyu of British East Africa <q>have a curious custom
which requires that every boy just before circumcision must
be born again. The mother stands up with the boy crouching
at her feet; she pretends to go through all the labour pains,
and the boy on being reborn cries like a babe and is
washed. He lives on milk for some days afterwards.</q><note place='foot'>Extract from a letter of Mr. A. C.
Hollis to me. Mr. Hollis's authority
is Dr. T. W. W. Crawford of the
Kenia Medical Mission.</note>
A fuller description of the ceremony was given by a member
of the Kikuyu tribe as follows: <q>A day is appointed, any
time of year, by father and mother. If the father is dead
another elder is called in to act as proxy in his stead, or if
the mother is not living another woman to act in her place.
Any woman thus acting as representative is looked upon in
future by the boy as his own mother. A goat or sheep is
killed in the afternoon by any one, usually not by the father,
and the stomach and intestines reserved. The ceremony
begins in the evening. A piece of skin is cut in a circle, and
passed over one shoulder of the candidate and under the
other arm. The stomach of the goat is similarly treated and
passed over the other shoulder and under the other arm.
All the boy's ornaments are removed, but not his clothes.
No men are allowed inside the hut, but women are present.
The mother sits on a hide on the floor with the boy between
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
her knees. The sheep's gut is passed round the woman and
brought in front of the boy. The woman groans as in labour,
another woman cuts the gut, and the boy imitates the
cry of a new-born infant. The women present all applaud,
and afterwards the assistant and the mother wash the
boy. That night the boy sleeps in the same hut as the
mother.</q><note place='foot'>W. Scoresby Routledge and
Katherine Routledge, <hi rend='italic'>With a Prehistoric
People, the Akikuyu of British
East Africa</hi> (London, 1910), p. 152.
Compare C. W. Hobley, <q>Kikuyu
Customs and Beliefs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute</hi>, xl.
(1910) p. 441.</note> Here the cutting of the sheep's gut, which
unites the mother to the boy, is clearly an imitation of
severing the navel string. Nor is it boys alone who are
born again among the Akikuyu. <q>Girls go through the rite
of second birth as well as boys. It is sometimes administered
to infants. At one time the new birth was combined
with circumcision, and so the ceremony admitted
to the privileges and religious rites of the tribe. Afterwards
trouble took place on account of mere boys wishing to take
their place alongside of the young men and maintaining
they were justified in doing so. The old men then settled
the matter by separating the two. Unless the new birth has
been administered the individual is not in a position to be
admitted to circumcision, which is the outward sign of
admittance to the nation. Any who have not gone through
the rite cannot inherit property, nor take any part in the
religious rites of the country.</q><note place='foot'>Mr. A. W. McGregor, of the
Church Missionary Society, quoted by
W. S. Routledge and K. Routledge,
<hi rend='italic'>With a Prehistoric People</hi>, p. 151,
note. 1. Mr. McGregor <q>has resided
amongst the Akikuyu since 1901. He
has by his tact and kindness won the
confidence of the natives, and is the
greatest authority on their language</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, p. xxi).</note> For example, a man who
has not been born again is disqualified for carrying his dying
father out into the wilds and for disposing of his body after
death. The new birth seems to take place usually about the
tenth year, but the age varies with the ability of the father
to provide a goat, whose guts are necessary to enable the
boy or girl to be born again in due form.<note place='foot'>W. S. Routledge and K. Routledge,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 151.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rites
of initiation
among the
Bondeis
of East
Africa. Rites
of initiation
among the
Bushongo
of the
Congo.
The first
ordeal.
The second
ordeal. The last
ordeal: the
descent
from the
tree.</note>
Among the Bondeis, a tribe on the coast of German
East Africa, opposite to the island of Pemba, one of the
rites of initiation into manhood consists in a pretence of
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
slaying one of the lads with a sword; the entrails of a
fowl are placed on the boy's stomach to make the pretence
seem more real.<note place='foot'>Rev. G. Dale, <q>An Account of
the principal Customs and Habits of
the Natives inhabiting the Bondei
Country,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxv. (1896) p. 189.</note> Among the Bushongo, who inhabit a
district of the Belgian Congo bounded on the north and
east by the Sankuru River and on the west by the Kasai,
young boys had formerly to undergo certain rites of initiation,
amongst which a simulation of killing them would seem
to have had a place, though in recent times the youths have
been allowed to escape the ordeal by the payment of a fine.
The supreme chief of the tribe, who in old days bore the
title of God on Earth (<foreign rend='italic'>Chembe Kunji</foreign>), used to assemble
all the lads who had just reached puberty and send them
away into the forest, where they remained for several
months under the care of one of his sons. During their
seclusion they were deemed unclean and might see no one;
if they chanced to meet a woman, she had to flee before
them. By night the old men marched round the quarters
of the novices, raising hideous cries and whirling bull-roarers,
the noise of which the frightened lads took to be the
voices of ghosts. They wore nothing but a comb, and
passed their leisure hours in learning to make mats and
baskets. After about a month they had to submit to the first
ordeal. A trench about ten feet deep was dug in the ground
and roofed over with sticks and earth so as to form a dark
tunnel. In the sides of the tunnel were cut niches, and in
each niche a man took post, whose business it was to terrify
the novices. For this purpose one of them was disguised in
the skin of a leopard, a second was dressed as a warrior with
a knife in his hand, a third was a smith with his furnace and
red-hot irons, and a fourth was masked to look like an ugly
ape, while he too gripped a knife in his hand. The novices
generally recoiled in dismay from each of these apparitions,
and it was only by means of reiterated taunts and threats that
the elders forced them to traverse the whole length of the
tunnel. After the lapse of another month the youths had to
face another ordeal of a similar character. A low tunnel, about
three feet deep, was dug in the earth, and sticks were inserted
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
in it so that their tops projected from the surface of the ground.
At the end of the tunnel a calabash was set full of goat's blood.
By way of encouraging the timid novices the master of the
ceremonies himself crawled through the tunnel, his progress
under ground being revealed to the novices above ground by
the vibrations of the sticks with which he collided in the
dark passage. Then having bedabbled his nose, his mouth,
and all the rest of his body with the goat's blood, he emerged
from the tunnel on hands and knees, dripping with gore and
to all appearance in the last stage of exhaustion. Then he
lay prostrate on his stomach in a state of collapse; the elders
declared him to be dead and carried him off. The chief
now ordered the lads to imitate the example set them by
the master of the ceremonies, but they begged and prayed
to be excused. At first the chief was inexorable, but in time
he relented and agreed to accept a fine of so many cowries as
a ransom paid by the youths for exemption from the ordeal.
A month later the last of the ordeals took place. A great
trunk of a tree was buried with its lower end in the earth
and surrounded for three-quarters of its circumference with
arrows stuck in the ground so that the barbs were pointed
towards the tree. The chief and the leading men sat down
at the gap in the circle of arrows, so as to conceal the gap
from the eyes of the novices and other spectators, among whom
the women were allowed to be present. To the eyes of the
uninitiated it now seemed that the tree was surrounded by a
bristling hedge of arrows, to fall upon which would be death.
All being ready the master of the ceremonies climbed the
tree amid breathless silence, and having reached the top,
which was decorated with a bunch of leaves, he looked about
him and asked the women, <q>Shall I come down?</q> <q>No!
no!</q> they shrieked, <q>you will be killed by the arrows.</q>
Then, turning disdainfully from these craven souls, the
gallant man addressed himself to the youths and repeated
his question, <q>Shall I come down?</q> A shout of <q>Yes!</q>
gave the answer that might have been expected from these
heroic spirits. In response the master of the ceremonies at
once slid down the tree and, dropping neatly to the ground
just at the gap in the hedge of arrows, presented himself
unscathed to the gaze of the excited assembly. The chief
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
now ordered the young men to go up and do likewise. But
the dauntless courage with which they had contemplated the
descent of the master of the ceremonies entirely forsook them
when it came to their turn to copy his shining example.
Their mothers, too, raised a loud cry of protest, joining their
prayers and entreaties to those of their hopeful sons. After
some discussion the chief consented to accept a ransom, and
the novices were dispensed from the ordeal. Then they
bathed and were deemed to have rid themselves of their
uncleanness, but they had still to work for the chief for
three months before they ranked as full-grown men and
might return to their villages.<note place='foot'>E. Torday et T. A. Joyce, <hi rend='italic'>Les
Bushongo</hi> (Brussels, 1910), pp. 82-85.
As for the title <q>God on Earth,</q>
applied to the principal chief or king,
see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, p. 53.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rites
of initiation
among the
Indians
of Virginia:
pretence
of the
novices
that they
have forgotten
their
former life.</note>
Among the Indians of Virginia, an initiatory ceremony,
called <foreign rend='italic'>Huskanaw</foreign>, took place every sixteen or twenty years,
or oftener, as the young men happened to grow up. The
youths were kept in solitary confinement in the woods for
several months, receiving no food but an infusion of some
intoxicating roots, so that they went raving mad, and continued
in this state eighteen or twenty days. <q>Upon this
occasion it is pretended that these poor creatures drink so
much of the water of Lethe that they perfectly lose the
remembrance of all former things, even of their parents, their
treasure, and their language. When the doctors find that
they have drunk sufficiently of the Wysoccan (so they call
this mad potion), they gradually restore them to their senses
again by lessening the intoxication of their diet; but before
they are perfectly well they bring them back into their
towns, while they are still wild and crazy through the violence
of the medicine. After this they are very fearful of discovering
anything of their former remembrance; for if such a
thing should happen to any of them, they must immediately
be <foreign rend='italic'>Huskanaw'd</foreign> again; and the second time the usage is so
severe that seldom any one escapes with life. Thus they
must pretend to have forgot the very use of their tongues,
so as not to be able to speak, nor understand anything that
is spoken, till they learn it again. Now, whether this be
real or counterfeit, I don't know; but certain it is that they
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
will not for some time take notice of anybody nor anything
with which they were before acquainted, being still under
the guard of their keepers, who constantly wait upon them
everywhere till they have learnt all things perfectly over
again. Thus they unlive their former lives, and commence
men by forgetting that they ever have been boys.</q><note place='foot'>(Beverley's) <hi rend='italic'>History of Virginia</hi>
(London, 1722), pp. 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare
J. Bricknell, <hi rend='italic'>The Natural History of
North Carolina</hi> (Dublin, 1737), pp.
405 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ritual
of death
and resurrection
at initiation
into the
secret
societies
of North
America. The medicine-bag
as an instrument
of death
and resurrection. Ritual
of death
and resurrection
at initiation
among the
Dacotas.</note>
Among some of the Indian tribes of North America
there exist certain religious associations which are only open
to candidates who have gone through a pretence of being
killed and brought to life again. In 1766 or 1767 Captain
Jonathan Carver witnessed the admission of a candidate to an
association called <q>the friendly society of the Spirit</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Wakon-Kitchewah</foreign>)
among the Naudowessies, a Siouan or Dacotan
tribe in the region of the great lakes. The candidate knelt
before the chief, who told him that <q>he himself was now
agitated by the same spirit which he should in a few
moments communicate to him; that it would strike him
dead, but that he would instantly be restored again to
life; to this he added, that the communication, however
terrifying, was a necessary introduction to the advantages
enjoyed by the community into which he was on the point
of being admitted. As he spoke this, he appeared to be
greatly agitated; till at last his emotions became so violent,
that his countenance was distorted, and his whole frame convulsed.
At this juncture he threw something that appeared
both in shape and colour like a small bean, at the young
man, which seemed to enter his mouth, and he instantly
fell as motionless as if he had been shot.</q> For a time the
man lay like dead, but under a shower of blows he shewed
signs of consciousness, and finally, discharging from his
mouth the bean, or whatever it was that the chief had thrown
at him, he came to life.<note place='foot'>J. Carver, <hi rend='italic'>Travels through the
Interior Parts of North America</hi>,
Third Edition (London, 1781), pp.
271-275. The thing thrown at the
man and afterwards vomited by him
was probably not a bean but a small
white sea-shell (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cypraea moneta</foreign>). See
H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes of
the United States</hi> (Philadelphia, 1853-1856),
iii. 287; J. G. Kohl, <hi rend='italic'>Kitschi-Gami</hi>
(Bremen, 1859), i. 71; <hi rend='italic'>Seventh
Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1891), pp. 191,
215; <hi rend='italic'>Fourteenth Annual Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1896), p. 101.</note> In other tribes, for example, the
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
Ojebways, Winnebagoes, and Dacotas or Sioux, the instrument
by which the candidate is apparently slain is the
medicine-bag. The bag is made of the skin of an animal
(such as the otter, wild cat, serpent, bear, raccoon, wolf, owl,
weasel), of which it roughly preserves the shape. Each
member of the society has one of these bags, in which he
keeps the odds and ends that make up his <q>medicine</q> or
charms. <q>They believe that from the miscellaneous contents
in the belly of the skin bag or animal there issues a spirit or
breath, which has the power, not only to knock down and
kill a man, but also to set him up and restore him to life.</q>
The mode of killing a man with one of these medicine-bags
is to thrust it at him; he falls like dead, but a second thrust
of the bag restores him to life.<note place='foot'>J. Carver, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes of
the United States</hi>, iii. 287 (as to the
Winnebagoes), v. 430 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (as to the
Chippeways and Sioux); J. G. Kohl,
<hi rend='italic'>Kitschi-Gami</hi>, i. 64-70 (as to the
Ojebways). For a very detailed
account of the Ojebway ceremonies,
see W. J. Hoffman, <q>The Midewiwin
or Grand Medicine Society of the
Ojibwa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Seventh Annual Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1891), especially pp. 215 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
248, 265. For similar ceremonies
among the Menomini, see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>The
Menomini Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Fourteenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1896), pp. 99-102; and
among the Omahas, see J. Owen
Dorsey, <q>Omaha Sociology,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Third
Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1884), pp. 342-346.
I have dealt more fully with
the ritual in <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>,
iii. 462 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare also P. Radin,
<q>Ritual and Significance of the Winnebago
Medicine Dance,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
American Folk-lore</hi>, xxiv. (1911) pp.
149-208.</note> Among the Dacotas the
institution of the medicine-bag or mystery-sack was attributed
to Onktehi, the great spirit of the waters, who ordained that
the bag should consist of the skin of the otter, raccoon,
weasel, squirrel, or loon, or a species of fish and of serpents.
Further, he decreed that the bag should contain four sorts of
medicines of magical qualities, which should represent fowls,
quadrupeds, herbs, and trees. Accordingly, swan's down,
buffalo hair, grass roots, and bark from the roots of trees are
kept by the Dacotas in their medicine-bags. From this
combination there proceeds a magical influence (<foreign rend='italic'>tonwan</foreign>)
so powerful that no human being can of his own strength
withstand it. When the god of the waters had prepared the
first medicine-bag, he tested its powers on four candidates
for initiation, who all perished under the shock. So he
consulted with his wife, the goddess of the earth, and by
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
holding up his left hand and pattering on the back of it
with the right, he produced myriads of little shells, whose
virtue is to restore life to those who have been slain by the
medicine-bag. Having taken this precaution, the god chose
four other candidates and repeated the experiment of initiation
with success, for after killing them with the bag he
immediately resuscitated them by throwing one of the shells
into their vital parts, while he chanted certain words assuring
them that it was only sport and bidding them rise to
their feet. That is why to this day every initiated Dacota
has one of these shells in his body. Such was the divine
origin of the medicine-dance of the Dacotas. The initiation
takes place in a special tent. The candidate, after being
steamed in a vapour-bath for four successive days, plants
himself on a pile of blankets, and behind him stands an aged
member of the order. <q>Now the master of the ceremonies,
with the joints of his knees and hips considerably bent,
advances with an unsteady, uncouth hitching, sack in hand,
wearing an aspect of desperate energy, and uttering his
<q>Heen, heen, heen</q> with frightful emphasis, while all around
are enthusiastic demonstrations of all kinds of wild passions.
At this point the sack is raised near a painted spot on the
breast of the candidate, at which the <foreign rend='italic'>tonwan</foreign> is discharged.
At the instant the brother from behind gives him a push and
he falls dead, and is covered with blankets. Now the
frenzied dancers gather around, and in the midst of bewildering
and indescribable noises, chant the words uttered by the
god at the institution of the ceremony, as already recorded.
Then the master throws off the covering, and chewing a
piece of the bone of the Onktehi, spirts it over him, and he
begins to show signs of returning life. Then as the master
pats energetically upon the breast of the initiated person, he,
convulsed, strangling, struggling, and agonizing, heaves up
the shell which falls from his mouth on a sack placed in
readiness to receive it. Life is restored and entrance effected
into the awful mysteries. He belongs henceforth to the
medicine-dance, and has a right to enjoy the medicine-feast.</q><note place='foot'>G. H. Pond, <q>Dakota superstitions,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Collections of the Minnesota
Historical Society for the year 1867</hi>
(Saint Paul, 1867), pp. 35, 37-40. A
similar but abridged account of the
Dakota tradition and usage is given by
S. R. Riggs in his <hi rend='italic'>Dakota Grammar,
Texts, and Ethnography</hi> (Washington,
1893), pp. 227-229 (<hi rend='italic'>Contributions to
North American Ethnology</hi>, vol. ix.).</note>
</p>

<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ritual
of mimic
death
among the
Indians
of Nootka
Sound.</note>
A ceremony witnessed by the castaway John R. Jewitt
during his captivity among the Indians of Nootka Sound doubtless
belongs to this class of customs. The Indian king or chief
<q>discharged a pistol close to his son's ear, who immediately fell
down as if killed, upon which all the women of the house set
up a most lamentable cry, tearing handfuls of hair from their
heads, and exclaiming that the prince was dead; at the
same time a great number of the inhabitants rushed into the
house armed with their daggers, muskets, etc., enquiring the
cause of their outcry. These were immediately followed by
two others dressed in wolf skins, with masks over their faces
representing the head of that animal. The latter came in
on their hands and feet in the manner of a beast, and taking
up the prince, carried him off upon their backs, retiring
in the same manner they entered.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Adventures and
Sufferings of John R. Jewitt</hi> (Middletown,
1820), p. 119.</note> In another place
Jewitt mentions that the young prince&mdash;a lad of about
eleven years of age&mdash;wore a mask in imitation of a wolf's
head.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, p. 44. For the age of the
prince, see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, p. 35.</note> Now, as the Indians of this part of America are
divided into totem clans, of which the Wolf clan is one of
the principal, and as the members of each clan are in the
habit of wearing some portion of the totem animal about
their person,<note place='foot'>H. J. Holmberg, <q>Ueber die
Völker des russischen Amerika,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Acta
Societatis Scientiarum Fennicae</hi>, iv.
(Helsingfors, 1856) pp. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 328;
Ivan Petroff, <hi rend='italic'>Report on the Population,
Industries and Resources of Alaska</hi>,
pp. 165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Krause, <hi rend='italic'>Die Tlinkit-Indianer</hi>
(Jena, 1885), p. 112; R. C.
Mayne, <hi rend='italic'>Four Years in British Columbia
and Vancouver Island</hi> (London,
1862), pp. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 268; <hi rend='italic'>Totemism
and Exogamy</hi>, iii. 264 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> it is probable that the prince belonged to the
Wolf clan, and that the ceremony described by Jewitt represented
the killing of the lad in order that he might be born
anew as a wolf, much in the same way that the Basque
hunter supposed himself to have been killed and to have
come to life again as a bear.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rite of
death and
resurrection
at
initiation
into the
Nootka
society of
human
wolves.
Novice
brought
back by an
artificial
totemic
animal
among the
Niska
Indians.</note>
This conjectural explanation of the ceremony has, since
it was first put forward, been confirmed by the researches of
Dr. Franz Boas among these Indians; though it would seem
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
that the community to which the chief's son thus obtained
admission was not so much a totem clan as a secret society
called Tlokoala, whose members imitated wolves. The
name Tlokoala is a foreign word among the Nootka Indians,
having been borrowed by them from the Kwakiutl Indians,
in whose language the word means the finding of a <foreign rend='italic'>manitoo</foreign>
or personal totem. The Nootka tradition runs that this
secret society was instituted by wolves who took away a
chief's son and tried to kill him, but, failing to do so, became
his friends, taught him the rites of the society, and ordered
him to teach them to his friends on his return home. Then
they carried the young man back to his village. They also
begged that whenever he moved from one place to another
he would kindly leave behind him some red cedar-bark to be
used by them in their own ceremonies; and to this custom
the Nootka tribes still adhere. Every new member of the
society must be initiated by the wolves. At night a pack
of wolves, personated by Indians dressed in wolf-skins and
wearing wolf-masks, make their appearance, seize the novice,
and carry him into the woods. When the wolves are heard
outside the village, coming to fetch away the novice, all the
members of the society blacken their faces and sing, <q>Among
all the tribes is great excitement, because I am Tlokoala.</q>
Next day the wolves bring back the novice dead, and the
members of the society have to revive him. The wolves are
supposed to have put a magic stone into his body, which
must be removed before he can come to life. Till this is
done the pretended corpse is left lying outside the house.
Two wizards go and remove the stone, which appears to be
quartz, and then the novice is resuscitated.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, pp.
47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report
of the British Association</hi>, Leeds
meeting, 1890); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>The Social
Organization and the Secret Societies
of the Kwakiutl Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of the
United States National Museum for
1895</hi>; (Washington, 1897), pp. 632 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
But while the initiation described in the
text was into a wolf society, not into a
wolf clan, it is to be observed that the
wolf is one of the regular totems of the
Nootka Indians. See Fr. Boas, in
<hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report on the North-Western
Tribes of Canada</hi>, p. 32.</note> Among the
Niska Indians of British Columbia, who are divided into four
principal clans with the raven, the wolf, the eagle, and the bear
for their respective totems, the novice at initiation is always
brought back by an artificial totem animal. Thus when a
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
man was about to be initiated into a secret society called
Olala, his friends drew their knives and pretended to kill
him. In reality they let him slip away, while they cut off the
head of a dummy which had been adroitly substituted for him.
Then they laid the decapitated dummy down and covered it
over, and the women began to mourn and wail. His relations
gave a funeral banquet and solemnly burnt the effigy.
In short, they held a regular funeral. For a whole year the
novice remained absent and was seen by none but members
of the secret society. But at the end of that time he came
back alive, carried by an artificial animal which represented
his totem.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Tenth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, pp.
49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 58 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (separate reprint from
the <hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association</hi>,
Ipswich meeting, 1895). It is remarkable,
however, that in this tribe persons
who are being initiated into the secret
societies, of which there are six, are
not always or even generally brought
back by an artificial animal which represents
their own totem. Thus while men
of the eagle totem are brought back by
an eagle which rises from underground,
men of the bear clan return on the
back of an artificial killer-whale which
is towed across the river by ropes.
Again, members of the wolf clan are
brought back by an artificial bear, and
members of the raven clan by a frog.
In former times the appearance of the
artificial totem animal, or of the guardian
spirit, was considered a matter of
great importance, and any failure which
disclosed the deception to the uninitiated
was deemed a grave misfortune
which could only be atoned for by the
death of the persons concerned in the
disclosure.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In these
initiatory
rites the
novice
seems to be
killed as a
man and
restored to
life as an
animal.</note>
In these ceremonies the essence of the rite appears
to be the killing of the novice in his character of a man
and his restoration to life in the form of the animal which
is thenceforward to be, if not his guardian spirit, at least
linked to him in a peculiarly intimate relation. It is to
be remembered that the Indians of Guatemala, whose life
was bound up with an animal, were supposed to have the
power of appearing in the shape of the particular creature
with which they were thus sympathetically united.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>.</note> Hence
it seems not unreasonable to conjecture that in like manner
the Indians of British Columbia may imagine that their life
depends on the life of some one of that species of creature to
which they assimilate themselves by their costume. At least
if that is not an article of belief with the Columbian Indians
of the present day, it may very well have been so with their
ancestors in the past, and thus may have helped to mould
the rites and ceremonies both of the totem clans and of the
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
secret societies. For though these two sorts of communities
differ in respect of the mode in which membership of them
is obtained&mdash;a man being born into his totem clan but
admitted into a secret society later in life&mdash;we can hardly
doubt that they are near akin and have their root in the
same mode of thought.<note place='foot'>This is the opinion of Dr. F. Boas,
who writes: <q>The close similarity between
the clan legends and those of
the acquisition of spirits presiding over
secret societies, as well as the intimate
relation between these and the social
organizations of the tribes, allow us to
apply the same argument to the consideration
of the growth of the secret
societies, and lead us to the conclusion
that the same psychical factor that
molded the clans into their present shape
molded the secret societies</q> (<q>The
Social Organization and the Secret
Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Report of the United States National
Museum for 1895</hi>, p. 662). Dr. Boas
would see in the acquisition of a <foreign rend='italic'>manitoo</foreign>
or personal totem the origin both
of the secret societies and of the totem
clans; for according to him the totem
of the clan is merely the <foreign rend='italic'>manitoo</foreign> or
personal totem of the ancestor transmitted
by inheritance to his descendants.
As to personal totems or guardian
spirits (<foreign rend='italic'>manitoos</foreign>) among the North
American Indians, see <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and
Exogamy</hi>, iii. 370 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; as to their
secret societies, see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, iii. 457 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
as to the theory that clan totems originated
in personal or individual totems,
see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, iv. 48 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> That thought, if I am right, is
the possibility of establishing a sympathetic relation with
an animal, a spirit, or other mighty being, with whom a
man deposits for safe-keeping his soul or some part of
it, and from whom he receives in return a gift of magical
powers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Honorific
totems
among the
Carrier
Indians. Initiatory
rites at the
adoption of
a honorific
totem.
Simulated
transformation
of a
novice into
a bear. Pretence of
death and
resurrection
at
initiation.</note>
The Carrier Indians, who dwell further inland than the
tribes we have just been considering, are divided into four
clans with the grouse, the beaver, the toad, and the grizzly
bear for their totems. But in addition to these clan totems
the tribe recognized a considerable number of what Father
Morice calls honorific totems, which could be acquired,
through the performance of certain rites, by any person who
wished to improve his social position. Each totem clan had
a certain number of honorific totems or crests, and these
might be assumed by any member of the clan who fulfilled
the required conditions; but they could not be acquired by
members of another clan. Thus the Grouse clan had for its
honorific totems or crests the owl, the moose, the weasel,
the crane, the wolf, the full moon, the wind, and so on; the
Toad clan had the sturgeon, the porcupine, the wolverine,
the red-headed woodpecker, the <q>darding knife,</q> and so
forth; the Beaver clan had the mountain-goat for one of its
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
honorific totems; and the goose was a honorific totem of
the Grizzly Bear clan. But the common bear, as a honorific
totem or crest, might be assumed by anybody, whatever his
clan. The common possession of a honorific totem appears
to have constituted the same sort of bond among the Carrier
Indians as the membership of a secret society does among
the coast tribes of British Columbia; certainly the rites of
initiation were similar. This will be clear from Father
Morice's account of the performances, which I will subjoin in
his own words. <q>The connection of the individual with his
crest appeared more especially during ceremonial dances,
when the former, attired, if possible, with the spoils of the
latter, was wont to personate it in the gaze of an admiring
assemblage. On all such occasions, man and totem were
also called by the same name. The adoption of any such
'rite' or crest was usually accompanied by initiatory ceremonies
or observances corresponding to the nature of the
crest, followed in all cases by a distribution of clothes to all
present. Thus whenever anybody resolved upon getting
received as <foreign rend='italic'>Lulem</foreign> or Bear, he would, regardless of the
season, divest himself of all his wearing apparel and don a
bear-skin, whereupon he would dash into the woods there
to remain for the space of three or four days and nights in
deference to the wonts of his intended totem animal. Every
night a party of his fellow-villagers would sally out in search
of the missing <q>bear.</q> To their loud calls: <foreign rend='italic'>Yi! Kelulem</foreign>
(Come on, Bear!) he would answer by angry growls in
imitation of the bear. The searching party making for the
spot where he had been heard, would find by a second call
followed by a similar answer that he had dexterously shifted
to some opposite quarter in the forest. As a rule, he could
not be found, but had to come back of himself, when he was
speedily apprehended and conducted to the ceremonial lodge,
where he would commence his first bear-dance in conjunction
with all the other totem people, each of whom would then personate
his own particular totem. Finally would take place
the <foreign rend='italic'>potlatch</foreign> [distribution of property] of the newly initiated
<q>bear,</q> who would not forget to present his captor with at least
a whole dressed skin. The initiation to the <q>Darding Knife</q>
was quite a theatrical performance. A lance was prepared
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
which had a very sharp point so arranged that the slightest
pressure on its tip would cause the steel to gradually sink
into the shaft. In the sight of the multitude crowding the
lodge, this lance was pressed on the bare chest of the
candidate and apparently sunk in his body to the shaft,
when he would tumble down simulating death. At the
same time a quantity of blood&mdash;previously kept in the
mouth&mdash;would issue from the would-be corpse, making it
quite clear to the uninitiated gazers-on that the terrible
knife had had its effect, when lo! upon one of the actors
striking up one of the chants specially made for the circumstance
and richly paid for, the candidate would gradually
rise up a new man, the particular <foreign rend='italic'>protégé</foreign> of the <q>Darding
Knife.</q></q><note place='foot'>A. G. Morice, <q>Notes, archaeological,
industrial, and sociological, on
the Western Dénés,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of
the Canadian Institute</hi>, iv. (1892-93)
pp. 203-206. The honorific totems
of the Carrier Indians may perhaps
correspond in some measure to the
sub-totems or multiplex totems of the
Australians. As to these latter see
<hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>, i. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
133 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Significance
of
these
initiatory
rites.
Supposed
invulnerability
of
men who
have
weapons
for their
guardian
spirits.</note>
In the former of these two initiatory rites of the Carrier
Indians the prominent feature is the transformation of the
man into his totem animal; in the latter it is his death and
resurrection. But in substance, probably, both are identical.
In both the novice dies as a man and revives as his totem,
whether that be a bear, a <q>darding</q> knife, or what not; in
other words, he has deposited his life or some portion of it in
his totem, with which accordingly for the future he is more
or less completely identified. Hard as it may be for us to
conceive why a man should choose to identify himself with a
knife, whether <q>darding</q> or otherwise, we have to remember
that in Celebes it is to a chopping-knife or other iron tool
that the soul of a woman in labour is transferred for safety;<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
and the difference between a chopping-knife and a <q>darding</q>
knife, considered as a receptacle for a human soul, is perhaps
not very material. Among the Thompson Indians of
British Columbia warriors who had a knife, an arrow, or
any other weapon for their personal totem or guardian
spirit, enjoyed this signal advantage over their fellows that
they were for all practical purposes invulnerable. If an
arrow did hit them, which seldom happened, they vomited
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
the blood up, and the hurt soon healed. Hence these
arrow-proof warriors rarely wore armour, which would indeed
have been superfluous, and they generally took the
most dangerous posts in battle. So convinced were the
Thompson Indians of the power of their personal totem
or guardian spirit to bring them back to life, that some
of them killed themselves in the sure hope that the spirit
would immediately raise them up from the dead. Others,
more prudently, experimented on their friends, shooting
them dead and then awaiting more or less cheerfully their
joyful resurrection. We are not told that success crowned
these experimental demonstrations of the immortality of the
soul.<note place='foot'>James Teit, <hi rend='italic'>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia</hi>, p. 357 (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup
North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of
the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, April, 1900). Among the
Shuswap of British Columbia, when a
young man has obtained his personal
totem or guardian spirit, he is supposed
to become proof against bullets
and arrows (Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report
of the Committee on the North-Western
Tribes of Canada</hi>, p. 93, separate reprint
from the <hi rend='italic'>Report of the British
Association</hi>, Leeds meeting, 1890).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Initiatory
rite of the
Toukaway
Indians.</note>
The Toukaway Indians of Texas, one of whose totems
is the wolf, have a ceremony in which men, dressed in wolf-skins,
run about on all fours, howling and mimicking wolves.
At last they scratch up a living tribesman, who has been
buried on purpose, and putting a bow and arrows in his
hands, bid him do as the wolves do&mdash;rob, kill, and murder.<note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes
of the United States</hi> (Philadelphia,
1853-1856), v. 683. In a letter dated
16th Dec. 1887, Mr. A. S. Gatschet,
formerly of the Bureau of Ethnology,
Washington, wrote to me: <q>Among
the Toukawe whom in 1884 I found at
Fort Griffin [?], Texas, I noticed that
they never kill the big or grey wolf,
<foreign rend='italic'>hatchukunän</foreign>, which has a mythological
signification, <q>holding the earth</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>hatch</foreign>). He forms one of their totem
clans, and they have had a dance in his
honor, danced by the males only, who
carried sticks.</q></note>
The ceremony probably forms part of an initiatory rite like
the resurrection from the grave of the old man in the
Australian rites.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Traces of
the rite of
death and
resurrection
among
more
advanced
peoples.</note>
The simulation of death and resurrection or of a new
birth at initiation appears to have lingered on, or at least to
have left traces of itself, among peoples who have advanced
far beyond the stage of savagery. Thus, after his investiture
with the sacred thread&mdash;the symbol of his order&mdash;a Brahman
is called <q>twice born.</q> Manu says, <q>According to
the injunction of the revealed texts the first birth of an
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
Aryan is from his natural mother, the second happens on
the tying of the girdle of Muñga grass, and the third on the
initiation to the performance to a Srauta sacrifice.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Laws of Manu</hi>, ii. 169,
translated by G. Bühler (Oxford, 1886),
p. 61 (<hi rend='italic'>The Sacred Books of the East</hi>,
vol. xxv.); J. A. Dubois, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs, Institutions
et Cérémonies des Peuples de
l'Inde</hi> (Paris, 1825), i. 125; Monier
Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Religious Thought and Life
in India</hi> (London, 1883), pp. 360 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
396 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion
des Veda</hi> (Berlin, 1894), pp. 466
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> A
pretence of killing the candidate perhaps formed part of the
initiation to the Mithraic mysteries.<note place='foot'>Lampridius, <hi rend='italic'>Commodus</hi>, 9; C. W.
King, <hi rend='italic'>The Gnostics and their Remains</hi>,
Second Edition (London, 1887), pp.
127, 129. Compare Fr. Cumont,
<hi rend='italic'>Textes et Monuments figurés relatifs
aux mystères de Mithra</hi>, i. (Brussels,
1899) pp. 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Rohde,
<hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Tübingen and Leipsic, 1903),
ii. 400 n. 1; A. Dieterich, <hi rend='italic'>Eine Mithrasliturgie</hi>
(Leipsic, 1903), pp. 91,
157 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
motive for
attempting
to deposit
the soul
in a safe
place outside
of
the body
at puberty
may have
been a
fear of the
dangers
which,
according
to primitive
notions,
attend the
union of
the sexes.</note>
Thus, on the theory here suggested, wherever totemism is
found, and wherever a pretence is made of killing and bringing
to life again the novice at initiation, there may exist or
have existed not only a belief in the possibility of permanently
depositing the soul in some external object&mdash;animal, plant,
or what not&mdash;but an actual intention of so doing. If the
question is put, why do men desire to deposit their life outside
their bodies? the answer can only be that, like the
giant in the fairy tale, they think it safer to do so than to
carry it about with them, just as people deposit their money
with a banker rather than carry it on their persons. We
have seen that at critical periods the life or soul is sometimes
temporarily stowed away in a safe place till the
danger is past. But institutions like totemism are not
resorted to merely on special occasions of danger; they are
systems into which every one, or at least every male, is
obliged to be initiated at a certain period of life. Now the
period of life at which initiation takes place is regularly
puberty; and this fact suggests that the special danger
which totemism and systems like it are intended to obviate
is supposed not to arise till sexual maturity has been attained,
in fact, that the danger apprehended is believed to attend
the relation of the sexes to each other. It would be easy
to prove by a long array of facts that the sexual relation is
associated in the primitive mind with many serious perils;
but the exact nature of the danger apprehended is still
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
obscure. We may hope that a more exact acquaintance
with savage modes of thought will in time disclose this
central mystery of primitive society, and will thereby furnish
the clue, not only to totemism, but to the origin of the
marriage system.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII. The Golden Bough.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Balder's
life or
death in the
mistletoe.</note>
Thus the view that Balder's life was in the mistletoe is
entirely in harmony with primitive modes of thought. It
may indeed sound like a contradiction that, if his life was in
the mistletoe, he should nevertheless have been killed by a
blow from the plant. But when a person's life is conceived
as embodied in a particular object, with the existence of
which his own existence is inseparably bound up, and the
destruction of which involves his own, the object in question
may be regarded and spoken of indifferently as his life
or his death, as happens in the fairy tales. Hence if a
man's death is in an object, it is perfectly natural that he
should be killed by a blow from it. In the fairy tales
Koshchei the Deathless is killed by a blow from the egg or
the stone in which his life or death is secreted;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>; compare pp. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>,
<ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>.</note> the ogres
burst when a certain grain of sand&mdash;doubtless containing their
life or death&mdash;is carried over their heads;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</note> the magician
dies when the stone in which his life or death is contained
is put under his pillow;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>.</note> and the Tartar hero is warned
that he may be killed by the golden arrow or golden sword
in which his soul has been stowed away.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>. In the myth the
throwing of the weapons and of the
mistletoe at Balder and the blindness
of Hother who slew him remind us of
the custom of the Irish reapers who
kill the corn-spirit in the last sheaf by
throwing their sickles blindfold at it.
See <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the
Wild</hi>, i. 144. In Mecklenburg a cock
is sometimes buried in the ground and
a man who is blindfolded strikes at it
with a flail. If he misses it, another
tries, and so on till the cock is killed.
See K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</hi> (Vienna,
1879-1880), ii. 280. In England on
Shrove Tuesday a hen used to be tied
upon a man's back, and other men blindfolded struck at it with branches till they
killed it. See T. F. Thiselton Dyer,
<hi rend='italic'>British Popular Customs</hi> (London,
1876), p. 68. W. Mannhardt (<hi rend='italic'>Die
Korndämonen</hi>, Berlin, 1868, pp. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>)
has made it probable that such sports are
directly derived from the custom of killing
a cock upon the harvest-field as a
representative of the corn-spirit. See
<hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>, i.
277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> These customs, therefore, combined
with the blindness of Hother in the
myth, suggest that the man who killed
the human representative of the oak-spirit
was blindfolded, and threw his
weapon or the mistletoe from a little
distance. After the Lapps had killed
a bear&mdash;which was the occasion of
many superstitious ceremonies&mdash;the
bear's skin was hung on a post, and
the women, blindfolded, shot arrows at
it. See J. Scheffer, <hi rend='italic'>Lapponia</hi> (Frankfort,
1673), p. 240.</note>
</p>

<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The view
that the
mistletoe
contained
the life of
the oak
may have
been suggested
by
the position
of the
parasite
among the
boughs.
Indian
parallel to
Balder
and the
mistletoe.</note>
The idea that the life of the oak was in the mistletoe
was probably suggested, as I have said, by the observation
that in winter the mistletoe growing on the oak remains
green while the oak itself is leafless. But the position of
the plant&mdash;growing not from the ground but from the trunk
or branches of the tree&mdash;might confirm this idea. Primitive
man might think that, like himself, the oak-spirit had sought
to deposit his life in some safe place, and for this purpose
had pitched on the mistletoe, which, being in a sense neither
on earth nor in heaven, might be supposed to be fairly out
of harm's way. In the first chapter we saw that primitive
man seeks to preserve the life of his human divinities by
keeping them poised between earth and heaven, as the
place where they are least likely to be assailed by the
dangers that encompass the life of man on earth. We
can therefore understand why it has been a rule both of
ancient and of modern folk-medicine that the mistletoe
should not be allowed to touch the ground; were it to
touch the ground, its healing virtue would be gone.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxiv. 12; J.
Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 1010.
Compare below, p. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>.</note> This
may be a survival of the old superstition that the plant in
which the life of the sacred tree was concentrated should
not be exposed to the risk incurred by contact with the
earth. In an Indian legend, which offers a parallel to the
Balder myth, Indra swore to the demon Namuci that he
would slay him neither by day nor by night, neither with
staff nor with bow, neither with the palm of the hand nor
with the fist, neither with the wet nor with the dry. But
he killed him in the morning twilight by sprinkling over
him the foam of the sea.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Satapatha Brahmana</hi>, xii. 7.
3. 1-3, translated by J. Eggeling,
Part v. (Oxford, 1900) pp. 222 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>The Sacred Books of the East</hi>, vol.
xliv.); Denham Rouse, in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
Journal</hi>, vii. (1889) p. 61, quoting
<hi rend='italic'>Taittīrya Brāhmana</hi>, I. vii. 1.</note> The foam of the sea is just such
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
an object as a savage might choose to put his life in, because
it occupies that sort of intermediate or nondescript position
between earth and sky or sea and sky in which primitive
man sees safety. It is therefore not surprising that the
foam of the river should be the totem of a clan in India.<note place='foot'>Col. E. T. Dalton, <q>The Kols of
Chota-Nagpore,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
Ethnological Society</hi>, N.S. vi. (1868)
p. 36.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Analogous
superstitions
attaching
to a parasitic
rowan.</note>
Again, the view that the mistletoe owes its mystic character
partly to its not growing on the ground is confirmed by
a parallel superstition about the mountain-ash or rowan-tree.
In Jutland a rowan that is found growing out of the top
of another tree is esteemed <q>exceedingly effective against
witchcraft: since it does not grow on the ground witches
have no power over it; if it is to have its full effect it must
be cut on Ascension Day.</q><note place='foot'>Jens Kamp, <hi rend='italic'>Danske Folkeminder</hi>
(Odense, 1877), pp. 172, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, referred
to in Feilberg's <hi rend='italic'>Bidrag til en
Ordbog over Jyske Almuesmål</hi>, Fjerde
hefte (Copenhagen, 1888), p. 320.
For a sight of Feilberg's work I am
indebted to the kindness of the late
Rev. Walter Gregor, M.A., of Pitsligo,
who pointed out the passage to me.</note> Hence it is placed over doors
to prevent the ingress of witches.<note place='foot'>E. T. Kristensen, <hi rend='italic'>Iydske Folkeminder</hi>,
vi. 380, referred to by
Feilberg, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> According to Marcellus
(<hi rend='italic'>De Medicamentis</hi>, xxvi. 115), ivy
which springs from an oak is a remedy
for stone, provided it be cut with a
copper instrument.</note> In Sweden and Norway,
also, magical properties are ascribed to a <q>flying-rowan</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>flögrönn</foreign>), that is to a rowan which is found growing not in the
ordinary fashion on the ground but on another tree, or on a
roof, or in a cleft of the rock, where it has sprouted from seed
scattered by birds. They say that a man who is out in the
dark should have a bit of <q>flying-rowan</q> with him to chew;
else he runs a risk of being bewitched and of being unable
to stir from the spot.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herabkunft des
Feuers und des Göttertranks</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Gütersloh,
1886), pp. 175 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, quoting
Dybeck's <hi rend='italic'>Runa</hi>, 1845, pp. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A Norwegian story relates how
once on a time a Troll so bewitched some men who were
ploughing in a field that they could not drive a straight
furrow; only one of the ploughmen was able to resist the
enchantment because by good luck his plough was made
out of a <q>flying-rowan.</q><note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 176.</note> In Sweden, too, the <q>flying-rowan</q>
is used to make the divining rod, which discovers
hidden treasures. This useful art has nowadays unfortunately
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
been almost forgotten, but three hundred years ago
it was in full bloom, as we gather from the following contemporary
account. <q>If in the woods or elsewhere, on old
walls or on high mountains or rocks you perceive a rowan-tree
(<foreign lang='sv' rend='italic'>runn</foreign>) which has sprung from a seed that a bird has
dropped from its bill, you must either knock or break off
that rod or tree in the twilight between the third day and
the night after Ladyday. But you must take care that
neither iron nor steel touches it and that in carrying it
home you do not let it fall on the ground. Then place it
under the roof on a spot under which you have laid various
metals, and you will soon be surprised to see how that rod
under the roof gradually bends in the direction of the metals.
When your rod has sat there in the same spot for fourteen
days or more, you take a knife or an awl, which has been
stroked with a magnet, and with it you slit the bark on all
sides, and pour or drop the blood of a cock (best of all the
blood from the comb of a cock which is all of one colour) on
the said slits in the bark; and when the blood has dried,
the rod is ready and will give public proof of the efficacy of
its marvellous properties.</q><note place='foot'>Quoted by A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In Zimbales, a province of the
Philippine Islands, <q>a certain parasitic
plant that much resembles yellow moss
and grows high up on trees is regarded
as a very powerful charm. It is called
<foreign rend='italic'>gay-u-ma</foreign>, and a man who possesses
it is called <foreign rend='italic'>nanara gayuma</foreign>. If his
eyes rest on a person during the new
moon he will become sick at the
stomach, but he can cure the sickness
by laying hands on the afflicted part.</q>
See W. A. Reed, <hi rend='italic'>Negritos of Zambales</hi>
(Manilla, 1904), p. 67 (<hi rend='italic'>Department of
the Interior, Ethnological Survey Publications</hi>,
vol. ii. part i.). Mr. Reed
seems to mean that if a man who possesses
this parasitic plant sees a person at the
new moon, the person on whom his
eye falls will be sick in his stomach,
but that the owner of the parasite
can cure the sufferer by laying his (the
owner's) hands on his (the patient's)
stomach. It is interesting to observe
that the magical virtue of the parasitic
plant appears to be especially effective
at the new moon.</note> Just as in Scandinavia the
parasitic rowan is deemed a countercharm to sorcery, so in
Germany the parasitic mistletoe is still commonly considered
a protection against witchcraft, and in Sweden, as
we saw, the mistletoe which is gathered on Midsummer Eve
is attached to the ceiling of the house, the horse's stall or
the cow's crib, in the belief that this renders the Troll powerless
to injure man or beast.<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 97 §
128; L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in
Sweden</hi> (London, 1870), p. 269. See
above, p. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The fate of
the Hays
believed to
be bound
up with the
mistletoe
on Errol's
oak.</note>
The view that the mistletoe was not merely the instrument
of Balder's death, but that it contained his life, is
countenanced by the analogy of a Scottish superstition.
Tradition ran that the fate of the Hays of Errol, an estate
in Perthshire, near the Firth of Tay, was bound up with the
mistletoe that grew on a certain great oak. A member of
the Hay family has recorded the old belief as follows:
<q>Among the low country families the badges are now
almost generally forgotten; but it appears by an ancient
MS. and the tradition of a few old people in Perthshire,
that the badge of the Hays was the mistletoe. There was
formerly in the neighbourhood of Errol, and not far from
the Falcon stone, a vast oak of an unknown age, and upon
which grew a profusion of the plant: many charms and
legends were considered to be connected with the tree, and
the duration of the family of Hay was said to be united with
its existence. It was believed that a sprig of the mistletoe cut
by a Hay on Allhallowmas eve, with a new dirk, and after
surrounding the tree three times sunwise, and pronouncing
a certain spell, was a sure charm against all glamour or
witchery, and an infallible guard in the day of battle. A
spray gathered in the same manner was placed in the cradle
of infants, and thought to defend them from being changed
for elf-bairns by the fairies. Finally, it was affirmed, that
when the root of the oak had perished, <q>the grass should
grow in the hearth of Errol, and a raven should sit in the
falcon's nest.</q> The two most unlucky deeds which could be
done by one of the name of Hay were, to kill a white falcon,
and to cut down a limb from the oak of Errol. When the
old tree was destroyed I could never learn. The estate has
been some time sold out of the family of Hay, and of course
it is said that the fatal oak was cut down a short time
before.</q><note place='foot'>John Hay Allan, <hi rend='italic'>The Bridal of Caölchairn</hi> (London, 1822), pp. 337 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The old superstition is recorded in verses which
are traditionally ascribed to Thomas the Rhymer:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>While the mistletoe bats on Errol's aik,</hi></q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>And that aik stands fast,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The Hays shall flourish, and their good grey hawk</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Shall nocht flinch before the blast.</hi></l>
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
<l><hi rend='italic'>But when the root of the aik decays,</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>And the mistletoe dwines on its withered breast,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The grass shall grow on Errol's hearthstane,</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>And the corbie roup in the falcon's nest.</hi></q><note place='foot'>Rev. John B. Pratt, <hi rend='italic'>Buchan</hi>,
Second Edition (Aberdeen, Edinburgh,
and London, 1859), p. 342. <q><hi rend='italic'>The
corbie roup</hi></q> means <q>the raven croak.</q>
In former editions of this work my
only source of information as to the
mistletoe and oak of the Hays was an
extract from a newspaper which was
kindly copied and sent to me, without
the name of the newspaper, by the late
Rev. Walter Gregor, M.A., of Pitsligo.
For my acquaintance with the works of
J. H. Allan and J. B. Pratt I am
indebted to the researches of my
learned friend Mr. A. B. Cook, who
has already quoted them in his article
<q>The European Sky-God,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
xvii. (1906) pp. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
life of the
Lachlins
and the
deer of
Finchra.</note>
The idea that the fate of a family, as distinct from the
lives of its members, is bound up with a particular plant or
tree, is no doubt comparatively modern. The older view
may have been that the lives of all the Hays were in this
particular mistletoe, just as in the Indian story the lives of
all the ogres are in a lemon; to break a twig of the mistletoe
would then have been to kill one of the Hays. Similarly in
the island of Rum, whose bold mountains the voyager from
Oban to Skye observes to seaward, it was thought that if one
of the family of Lachlin shot a deer on the mountain of
Finchra, he would die suddenly or contract a distemper which
would soon prove fatal.<note place='foot'>M. Martin, <q>Description of the
Western Islands of Scotland,</q> in J.
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi> (London,
1808-1814), iii. 661.</note> Probably the life of the Lachlins
was bound up with the deer on Finchra, as the life of the
Hays was bound up with the mistletoe on Errol's oak, and
the life of the Dalhousie family with the Edgewell Tree.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Golden
Bough
seems to
have been
a glorified
mistletoe.</note>
It is not a new opinion that the Golden Bough was the
mistletoe.<note place='foot'>See James Sowerby, <hi rend='italic'>English
Botany</hi>, xxi. (London, 1805), p. 1470:
<q>The Misseltoe is celebrated in story
as the sacred plant of the Druids, and
the Golden Bough of Virgil, which
was Aeneas's passport to the infernal
regions.</q> Again, the author of the
<hi rend='italic'>Lexicon Mythologicum</hi> concludes, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cum
Jonghio nostro</foreign>,</q> that the Golden Bough
<q>was nothing but the mistletoe glorified
by poetical license.</q> See <hi rend='italic'>Edda
Rhythmica seu Antiquior, vulgo Saemundina
dicta</hi>, iii. (Copenhagen,
1828) p. 513 note. C. L. Rochholz
expresses the same opinion
(<hi rend='italic'>Deutscher Glaube und Brauch</hi>, Berlin,
1867, i. 9). The subject is discussed
at length by E. Norden, <hi rend='italic'>P. Vergilius
Maro, Aeneis Buch VI.</hi> (Leipsic, 1903)
pp. 161-171, who, however, does not
even mention the general or popular view
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>publica opinio</foreign>) current in the time of
Servius, that the Golden Bough was
the branch which a candidate for the
priesthood of Diana had to pluck in
the sacred grove of Nemi. I confess
I have more respect for the general
opinion of antiquity than to dismiss it
thus cavalierly without a hearing.</note> True, Virgil does not identify but only compares
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
it with mistletoe. But this may be only a poetical device to
cast a mystic glamour over the humble plant. Or, more
probably, his description was based on a popular superstition
that at certain times the mistletoe blazed out into a supernatural
golden glory. The poet tells how two doves, guiding
Aeneas to the gloomy vale in whose depth grew the Golden
Bough, alighted upon a tree, <q>whence shone a flickering
gleam of gold. As in the woods in winter cold the mistletoe&mdash;a
plant not native to its tree&mdash;is green with fresh leaves
and twines its yellow berries about the boles; such seemed
upon the shady holm-oak the leafy gold, so rustled in the
gentle breeze the golden leaf.</q><note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, compare
136 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> See Note IV. <q>The Mistletoe
and the Golden Bough</q> at the end of
this volume.</note> Here Virgil definitely
describes the Golden Bough as growing on a holm-oak,
and compares it with the mistletoe. The inference is almost
inevitable that the Golden Bough was nothing but the
mistletoe seen through the haze of poetry or of popular
superstition.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>If the
Golden
Bough
was the
mistletoe,
the King of
the Wood
at Nemi
may have
personated
an oak
spirit and
perished
in an oak
fire.</note>
Now grounds have been shewn for believing that the
priest of the Arician grove&mdash;the King of the Wood&mdash;personified
the tree on which grew the Golden Bough.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 40 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. 378 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Virgil
(<hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 201 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) places the Golden
Bough in the neighbourhood of Lake
Avernus. But this was probably a
poetical liberty, adopted for the convenience
of Aeneas's descent to the
infernal world. Italian tradition, as
we learn from Servius (on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi>
vi. 136), placed the Golden Bough in
the grove at Nemi.</note> Hence
if that tree was the oak, the King of the Wood must have
been a personification of the oak-spirit. It is, therefore,
easy to understand why, before he could be slain, it was
necessary to break the Golden Bough. As an oak-spirit, his
life or death was in the mistletoe on the oak, and so long
as the mistletoe remained intact, he, like Balder, could not
die. To slay him, therefore, it was necessary to break the
mistletoe, and probably, as in the case of Balder, to throw it
at him. And to complete the parallel, it is only necessary
to suppose that the King of the Wood was formerly burned,
dead or alive, at the midsummer fire festival which, as we
have seen, was annually celebrated in the Arician grove.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 12.</note>
The perpetual fire which burned in the grove, like the perpetual
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
fire which burned in the temple of Vesta at Rome
and under the oak at Romove,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 186, 366 note 2.</note> was probably fed with the
sacred oak-wood; and thus it would be in a great fire of oak
that the King of the Wood formerly met his end. At a
later time, as I have suggested, his annual tenure of office
was lengthened or shortened, as the case might be, by the
rule which allowed him to live so long as he could prove his
divine right by the strong hand. But he only escaped the
fire to fall by the sword.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A similar
tragedy
may have
been
enacted
over the
human
representative
of
Balder in
Norway.</note>
Thus it seems that at a remote age in the heart of Italy,
beside the sweet Lake of Nemi, the same fiery tragedy was
annually enacted which Italian merchants and soldiers were
afterwards to witness among their rude kindred, the Celts of
Gaul, and which, if the Roman eagles had ever swooped on
Norway, might have been found repeated with little difference
among the barbarous Aryans of the North. The rite
was probably an essential feature in the ancient Aryan
worship of the oak.<note place='foot'>A custom of annually burning or
otherwise sacrificing a human representative
of the corn-spirit has been
noted among the Egyptians, Pawnees,
and Khonds. See <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn
and of the Wild</hi>, i. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 245 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
259 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> We have seen that in Western
Asia there are strong traces of a practice
of annually burning a human god. See
<hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second Edition,
pp. 84 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 139 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
155 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The Druids appear to have
eaten portions of the human victim
(Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxx. 13). Perhaps
portions of the flesh of the King of the
Wood were eaten by his worshippers
as a sacrament. We have found traces
of the use of sacramental bread at
Nemi. See <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of
the Wild</hi>, ii. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
name of the
Golden
Bough may
have been
applied
to the
mistletoe
on account
of the
golden
tinge which
the plant
assumes in
withering.</note>
It only remains to ask, Why was the mistletoe called
the Golden Bough?<note place='foot'>It has been said that in Welsh a
name for mistletoe is <q>the tree of pure
gold</q> (<foreign lang='cy' rend='italic'>pren puraur</foreign>). See J. Grimm,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 1009, referring
to Davies. But my friend Sir
John Rhys tells me that the statement
is devoid of foundation.</note> The whitish-yellow of the mistletoe
berries is hardly enough to account for the name, for
Virgil says that the bough was altogether golden, stem
as well as leaves.<note place='foot'><p>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Latet arbore opaca<lb/>
Aureus et foliis et lento vimine ramus.</hi></q>
</p></note> Perhaps the name may be derived
from the rich golden yellow which a bough of mistletoe
assumes when it has been cut and kept for some months;
the bright tint is not confined to the leaves, but spreads
to the stalks as well, so that the whole branch appears
to be indeed a Golden Bough. Breton peasants hang up
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
great bunches of mistletoe in front of their cottages, and
in the month of June these bunches are conspicuous for
the bright golden tinge of their foliage.<note place='foot'>This suggestion as to the origin of
the name has been made to me by two
correspondents independently. Miss
Florence Grove, writing to me from
10 Milton Chambers, Cheyne Walk,
London, on May 13th, 1901, tells me
that she regularly hangs up a bough of
mistletoe every year and allows it to
remain till it is replaced by the new
branch next year, and from her observation
<q>the mistletoe is actually a golden
bough when kept a sufficiently long
time.</q> She was kind enough to send
me some twigs of her old bough, which
fully bore out her description. Again,
Mrs. A. Stuart writes to me from
Crear Cottage, Morningside Drive,
Edinburgh, on June 26th, 1901: <q>As
to why the mistletoe might be called
the Golden Bough, my sister Miss Haig
wishes me to tell you that last June,
when she was in Brittany, she saw
great bunches of mistletoe hung up in
front of the houses in the villages.
The leaves were <emph>bright golden</emph>. You
should hang up a branch next Christmas
and keep it till June!</q> The
great hollow oak of Saint-Denis-des-Puits,
in the French province of Perche,
is called <q>the gilded or golden oak</q>
(<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Chêne-Doré</foreign>) <q>in memory of the
Druidical tradition of the mistletoe cut
with a golden sickle.</q> See Felix
Chapiseau, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore de la Beauce et
du Perche</hi> (Paris, 1902), i. 97. Perhaps
the name may be derived from bunches
of withered mistletoe shining like gold
in the sunshine among the branches.</note> In some parts of
Brittany, especially about Morbihan, branches of mistletoe
are hung over the doors of stables and byres to protect the
horses and cattle,<note place='foot'>H. Gaidoz, <q>Bulletin critique de
la Mythologie Gauloise,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de
l'Histoire des Religions</hi>, ii. (Paris,
1880) p. 76.</note> probably against witchcraft.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The yellow
hue of
withered
mistletoe
may partly
explain
why the
plant is
thought to
disclose
yellow gold
in the
earth.
Similarly
fern-seed is
thought to
bloom like
gold or fire
and to reveal
buried
treasures
on Midsummer
Eve. Sometimes
fern-seed is
thought to
bloom on
Christmas
night.
The wicked
weaver of
Rotenburg.</note>
The yellow colour of the withered bough may partly
explain why the mistletoe has been sometimes supposed to
possess the property of disclosing treasures in the earth;<note place='foot'>See below, pp. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> for
on the principles of homoeopathic magic there is a natural
affinity between a yellow bough and yellow gold. This suggestion
is confirmed by the analogy of the marvellous properties
popularly ascribed to the mythical fern-seed or fern-bloom.
We saw that fern-seed is popularly supposed to bloom
like gold or fire on Midsummer Eve.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus in Bohemia it
is said that <q>on St. John's Day fern-seed blooms with golden
blossoms that gleam like fire.</q><note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 97,
§ 673.</note> Now it is a property of
this mythical fern-seed that whoever has it, or will ascend a
mountain holding it in his hand on Midsummer Eve, will
discover a vein of gold or will see the treasures of the earth
shining with a bluish flame.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 97, §
676; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 94, §
123; I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Innsbruck, 1871), p. 158, § 1350.</note> In Russia they say that if you
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
succeed in catching the wondrous bloom of the fern at midnight
on Midsummer Eve, you have only to throw it up into the
air, and it will fall like a star on the very spot where a treasure
lies hidden.<note place='foot'>C. Russwurm, <q>Aberglaube in
Russland,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche
Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>, iv. (1859),
pp. 152 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Angelo de Gubernatis,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythologie des Plantes</hi> (Paris, 1878-1882),
ii. 146.</note> In Brittany treasure-seekers gather fern-seed
at midnight on Midsummer Eve, and keep it till Palm
Sunday of the following year; then they strew the seed on
ground where they think a treasure is concealed.<note place='foot'>P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions et Superstitions
de la Haute-Bretagne</hi> (Paris,
1882), ii. 336; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes populaires
de la Haute-Bretagne</hi> (Paris, 1886), p.
217.</note> Tyrolese
peasants imagine that hidden treasures can be seen glowing
like flame on Midsummer Eve, and that fern-seed, gathered
at this mystic season, with the usual precautions, will help to
bring the buried gold to the surface.<note place='foot'>J. E. Waldfreund, <q>Volksgebräuche
und Aberglauben in Tirol und
dem Salzburger Gebirg,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>,
iii. (1855), p. 339.</note> In the Swiss canton
of Freiburg people used to watch beside a fern on St. John's
night in the hope of winning a treasure, which the devil
himself sometimes brought to them.<note place='foot'>H. Runge, <q>Volksglaube in der
Schweiz,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche
Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>, iv. (1859),
p. 175.</note> In Bohemia they say
that he who procures the golden bloom of the fern at this
season has thereby the key to all hidden treasures; and that
if maidens will spread a cloth under the fast-fading bloom,
red gold will drop into it.<note place='foot'>O. Frh. von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</hi> (Prague,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare Theodor
Vernaleken, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und Bräuche des
Volkes in Oesterreich</hi> (Vienna, 1859),
pp. 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; M. Töppen, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben
aus Masuren</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Danzig, 1867), pp. 72
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Even without the use of fern-seed
treasures are sometimes said to bloom
or burn in the earth, or to reveal their
presence by a bluish flame, on Midsummer
Eve; in Transylvania only
children born on a Sunday can see
them and fetch them up. See J. Haltrich,
<hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde der Siebenbürger
Sachsen</hi> (Vienna, 1885), p. 287; I. V.
Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen
des Tiroler Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Innsbruck,
1871), p. 159, §§ 1351, 1352; K.
Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und Gebrauche
aus Mecklenburg</hi> (Vienna, 1879-1880),
ii. 285, § 1431; E. Monseur, <hi rend='italic'>Folklore
Wallon</hi> (Brussels, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 6, § 1789;
K. Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch der Lausitz</hi>
(Leipsic, 1862-1863), i. 231 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, No.
275; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 76, § 92;
F. J. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem inneren
und äusseren Leben der Ehsten</hi> (St.
Petersburg, 1876), p. 363.</note> And in the Tyrol and Bohemia
if you place fern-seed among money, the money will never
decrease, however much of it you spend.<note place='foot'>I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 103, §
882; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche
Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>, i. (1853),
p. 330; W. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Volkskunde
der Deutschen in Mähren</hi> (Vienna
and Olmütz, 1893), p. 265. At Pergine, in the Tyrol, it was thought that
fern-seed gathered with the dew on St.
John's night had the power of transforming
metals (into gold?). See Ch.
Schneller, <hi rend='italic'>Märchen und Sagen aus
Wälschtirol</hi> (Innsbruck, 1867), p. 237,
§ 23.</note> Sometimes the
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
fern-seed is supposed to bloom on Christmas night, and
whoever catches it will become very rich.<note place='foot'>I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp.
190 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 1573.</note> In Styria they
say that by gathering fern-seed on Christmas night you can
force the devil to bring you a bag of money.<note place='foot'>A. Schlossar, <q>Volksmeinung und
Volksaberglaube aus der deutschen
Steiermark,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, N.R., xxiv.
(1891) p. 387.</note> In Swabia
likewise you can, by taking the proper precautions, compel
Satan himself to fetch you a packet of fern-seed on Christmas
night. But for four weeks previously, and during the whole
of the Advent season, you must be very careful never to
pray, never to go to church, and never to use holy water;
you must busy yourself all day long with devilish thoughts,
and cherish an ardent wish that the devil would help you to
get money. Thus prepared you take your stand, between
eleven and twelve on Christmas night, at the meeting of two
roads, over both of which corpses have been carried to the
churchyard. Here many people meet you, some of them
dead and buried long ago, it may be your parents or grandparents,
or old friends and acquaintances, and they stop and
greet you, and ask, <q>What are you doing here?</q> And tiny
little goblins hop and dance about and try to make you laugh.
But if you smile or utter a single word, the devil will tear you
to shreds and tatters on the spot. If, however, you stand
glum and silent and solemn, there will come, after all the
ghostly train has passed by, a man dressed as a hunter, and
that is the devil. He will hand you a paper cornet full of
fern-seed, which you must keep and carry about with you as
long as you live. It will give you the power of doing as
much work at your trade in a day as twenty or thirty ordinary
men could do in the same time. So you will grow very
rich. But few people have the courage to go through with
the ordeal. The people of Rotenburg tell of a weaver of
their town, who lived some two hundred and fifty years
ago and performed prodigies of weaving by a simple application
of fern-seed which he had been so fortunate as to obtain,
no doubt from the devil, though that is not expressly alleged
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
by tradition. Rich in the possession of this treasure, the lazy
rascal worked only on Saturdays and spent all the rest of
the week playing and drinking; yet in one day he wove
far more cloth than any other skilled weaver who sat at his
loom from morning to night every day of the week. Naturally
he kept his own counsel, and nobody might ever have
known how he did it, if it had not been for what, humanly
speaking, you might call an accident, though for my part I cannot
but regard it as the manifest finger of Providence. One
day&mdash;it was the octave of a festival&mdash;the fellow had woven
a web no less than a hundred ells long, and his mistress
resolved to deliver it to her customer the same evening. So
she put the cloth in a basket and away she trudged with it.
Her way led her past a church, and as she passed the
sacred edifice, she heard the tinkle of the holy bell which
announced the elevation of the Host. Being a good woman
she put her basket down, knelt beside it, and there, with the
shadows gathering round her, committed herself to the care
of God and his good angels and received, along with the
kneeling congregation in the lighted church, the evening
benediction, which kept her and them from all the perils and
dangers of the night. Then rising refreshed she took up her
basket. But what was her astonishment on looking into it
to find the whole web reduced to a heap of yarn! The
blessed words of the priest at the altar had undone the cursed
spell of the Enemy of Mankind.<note place='foot'>Ernst Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart,
1852), pp. 242-244.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The golden
or fiery
fern-seed
appears to
be an
emanation
of the sun's
fire.</note>
Thus, on the principle of like by like, fern-seed is
supposed to discover gold because it is itself golden; and
for a similar reason it enriches its possessor with an unfailing
supply of gold. But while the fern-seed is described
as golden, it is equally described as glowing and fiery.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>,
p. 97, § 675; W. R. S. Ralston,
<hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian People</hi>, Second
Edition (London, 1872), p. 98; C.
Russwurm, <q>Aberglaube in Russland,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und
Sittenkunde</hi>, iv. (1859) p. 152.</note>
Hence, when we consider that two great days for gathering
the fabulous seed are Midsummer Eve and Christmas&mdash;that
is, the two solstices (for Christmas is nothing but an old
heathen celebration of the winter solstice)&mdash;we are led to
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
regard the fiery aspect of the fern-seed as primary, and its
golden aspect as secondary and derivative. Fern-seed, in fact,
would seem to be an emanation of the sun's fire at the two
turning-points of its course, the summer and winter solstices.
This view is confirmed by a German story in which a hunter
is said to have procured fern-seed by shooting at the sun
on Midsummer Day at noon; three drops of blood fell down,
which he caught in a white cloth, and these blood-drops were
the fern-seed.<note place='foot'>L. Bechstein, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsches Sagenbuch</hi>
(Leipsic, 1853), p. 430, No. 500; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Thüringer Sagenbuch</hi> (Leipsic, 1885),
ii. pp. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, No. 161.</note> Here the blood is clearly the blood of the
sun, from which the fern-seed is thus directly derived. Thus
it may be taken as probable that fern-seed is golden, because
it is believed to be an emanation of the sun's golden fire.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Like fern-seed
the
mistletoe is
gathered at
the solstices
(Midsummer
and Christmas)
and is
supposed
to reveal
treasures in
the earth;
perhaps,
therefore,
it too is
deemed an
emanation
of the sun's
golden fire.
The bloom
of the oak
on Midsummer
Eve.</note>
Now, like fern-seed, the mistletoe is gathered either at
Midsummer or Christmas<note place='foot'>For gathering it at midsummer,
see above, pp. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The custom of
gathering it at Christmas still commonly
survives in England. At York <q>on
the eve of Christmas-day they carry
mistletoe to the high altar of the
cathedral, and proclaim a public and
universal liberty, pardon and freedom
to all sorts of inferior and even wicked
people at the gates of the city, toward
the four quarters of heaven.</q> See W.
Stukeley, <hi rend='italic'>The Medallic History of
Marcus Aurelius Valerius Carausius,
Emperor in Britain</hi> (London, 1757-1759),
ii. 164; J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular
Antiquities of Great Britain</hi> (London,
1882-1883), i. 525. This last custom,
which is now doubtless obsolete, may
have been a relic of an annual period
of license like the Saturnalia. The
traditional privilege accorded to men
of kissing any woman found under
mistletoe is probably another relic of
the same sort. See Washington Irving,
<hi rend='italic'>Sketch-Book</hi>, <q>Christmas Eve,</q> p. 147
(Bohn's edition); Marie Trevelyan,
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</hi>
(London, 1909), p. 88.</note>&mdash;that is, at the summer and
winter solstices&mdash;and, like fern-seed, it is supposed to
possess the power of revealing treasures in the earth. On
Midsummer Eve people in Sweden make divining-rods of
mistletoe, or of four different kinds of wood one of which
must be mistletoe. The treasure-seeker places the rod on
the ground after sun-down, and when it rests directly over
treasure, the rod begins to move as if it were alive.<note place='foot'>A. A. Afzelius, <hi rend='italic'>Volkssagen und
Volkslieder aus Schwedens älterer und
neuerer Zeit</hi> (Leipsic, 1842), i. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> iii.
289; L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>
(London, 1870), pp. 266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> See above,
p. 69. In the Tyrol they say that if
mistletoe grows on a hazel-tree, there
must be a treasure under the tree. See
J. N. Ritter von Alpenburg, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen
und Sagen Tirols</hi> (Zurich, 1857), p. 398.
In East Prussia a similar belief is held
in regard to mistletoe that grows on a
thorn. See C. Lemke, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches
in Ostpreussen</hi> (Mohrungen,
1884-1887), ii. 283. We have seen
that the divining-rod which reveals
treasures is commonly cut from a hazel
(above, pp. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> Now,
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
if the mistletoe discovers gold, it must be in its character of
the Golden Bough; and if it is gathered at the solstices, must
not the Golden Bough, like the golden fern-seed, be an emanation
of the sun's fire? The question cannot be answered with
a simple affirmative. We have seen that the old Aryans
perhaps kindled the solstitial and other ceremonial fires in
part as sun-charms, that is, with the intention of supplying the
sun with fresh fire; and as these fires were usually made by
the friction or combustion of oak-wood,<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg090'>90-92</ref>.</note> it may have appeared
to the ancient Aryan that the sun was periodically recruited
from the fire which resided in the sacred oak. In other words,
the oak may have seemed to him the original storehouse or
reservoir of the fire which was from time to time drawn out
to feed the sun. But if the life of the oak was conceived
to be in the mistletoe, the mistletoe must on that view have
contained the seed or germ of the fire which was elicited by
friction from the wood of the oak. Thus, instead of saying
that the mistletoe was an emanation of the sun's fire, it
might be more correct to say that the sun's fire was regarded
as an emanation of the mistletoe. No wonder, then, that
the mistletoe shone with a golden splendour, and was called
the Golden Bough. Probably, however, like fern-seed, it was
thought to assume its golden aspect only at those stated
times, especially midsummer, when fire was drawn from the
oak to light up the sun.<note place='foot'>Fern-seed is supposed to bloom at
Easter as well as at Midsummer and
Christmas (W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of
the Russian People</hi>, pp. 98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>); and
Easter, as we have seen, is one of
the times when fires are ceremonially
kindled, perhaps to recruit the fire of
the sun.</note> At Pulverbatch, in Shropshire, it
was believed within living memory that the oak-tree blooms
on Midsummer Eve and the blossom withers before daylight.
A maiden who wishes to know her lot in marriage
should spread a white cloth under the tree at night, and in
the morning she will find a little dust, which is all that
remains of the flower. She should place the pinch of dust
under her pillow, and then her future husband will appear
to her in her dreams.<note place='foot'>Miss C. S. Burne and Miss G. F.
Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi> (London,
1883), p. 242.</note> This fleeting bloom of the oak, if I
am right, was probably the mistletoe in its character of the
Golden Bough. The conjecture is confirmed by the observation
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
that in Wales a real sprig of mistletoe gathered on
Midsummer Eve is similarly placed under the pillow to
induce prophetic dreams;<note place='foot'>Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and
Folk-stories of Wales</hi> (London, 1909),
p. 88.</note> and further the mode of catching
the imaginary bloom of the oak in a white cloth is exactly
that which was employed by the Druids to catch the real
mistletoe when it dropped from the bough of the oak,
severed by the golden sickle.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvi. 251.</note> As Shropshire borders on
Wales, the belief that the oak blooms on Midsummer Eve
may be Welsh in its immediate origin, though probably the
belief is a fragment of the primitive Aryan creed. In some
parts of Italy, as we saw,<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> peasants still go out on Midsummer
morning to search the oak-trees for the <q>oil of St.
John,</q> which, like the mistletoe, heals all wounds, and is,
perhaps, the mistletoe itself in its glorified aspect. Thus it
is easy to understand how a title like the Golden Bough, so
little descriptive of its usual appearance on the tree, should
have been applied to the seemingly insignificant parasite.
Further, we can perhaps see why in antiquity mistletoe was
believed to possess the remarkable property of extinguishing
fire,<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxxiii. 94:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Calx aqua accenditur et Thracius
lapis, idem oleo restinguitur, ignis autem
aceto maxime et visco et ovo.</foreign></q></note> and why in Sweden it is still kept in houses as a safeguard
against conflagration.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>.</note> Its fiery nature marks it out,
on homoeopathic principles, as the best possible cure or
preventive of injury by fire.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Aeneas and
the Golden
Bough. Orpheus
and the
willow.</note>
These considerations may partially explain why Virgil
makes Aeneas carry a glorified bough of mistletoe with him
on his descent into the gloomy subterranean world. The
poet describes how at the very gates of hell there stretched
a vast and gloomy wood, and how the hero, following the
flight of two doves that lured him on, wandered into the
depths of the immemorial forest till he saw afar off through
the shadows of the trees the flickering light of the Golden
Bough illuminating the matted boughs overhead.<note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 179-209.</note> If the
mistletoe, as a yellow withered bough in the sad autumn
woods, was conceived to contain the seed of fire, what better
companion could a forlorn wanderer in the nether shades
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
take with him than a bough that would be a lamp to his
feet as well as a rod and staff to his hands? Armed with
it he might boldly confront the dreadful spectres that would
cross his path on his adventurous journey. Hence when
Aeneas, emerging from the forest, comes to the banks of
Styx, winding slow with sluggish stream through the infernal
marsh, and the surly ferryman refuses him passage in his
boat, he has but to draw the Golden Bough from his bosom
and hold it up, and straightway the blusterer quails at the
sight and meekly receives the hero into his crazy bark, which
sinks deep in the water under the unusual weight of the
living man.<note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 384-416.</note> Even in recent times, as we have seen,
mistletoe has been deemed a protection against witches and
trolls,<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>.</note> and the ancients may well have credited it with the
same magical virtue. And if the parasite can, as some
of our peasants believe, open all locks,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>.</note> why should it
not have served as an <q>open Sesame</q> in the hands of
Aeneas to unlock the gates of death? There is some reason
to suppose that when Orpheus in like manner descended
alive to hell to rescue the soul of his dead wife Eurydice
from the shades, he carried with him a willow bough to
serve as a passport on his journey to and from the land of
the dead; for in the great frescoes representing the nether
world, with which the master hand of Polygnotus adorned
the walls of a loggia at Delphi, Orpheus was depicted sitting
pensively under a willow, holding his lyre, now silent and
useless, in his left hand, while with his right he grasped the
drooping boughs of the tree.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, x. 30. 6.</note> If the willow in the picture
had indeed the significance which an ingenious scholar has
attributed to it,<note place='foot'>J. Six, <q>Die Eriphyle des Polygnot,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen des kaiserlich
deutschen Archaeologischen Instituts,
Athenische Abtheilung</hi>, xix. (1894)
pp. 338 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare my commentary
on Pausanias, vol. v. p. 385.</note> the painter meant to represent the dead
musician dreaming wistfully of the time when the willow had
carried him safe back across the Stygian ferry to that bright
world of love and music which he was now to see no more.
Again, on an ancient sarcophagus, which exhibits in sculptured
relief the parting of Adonis from Aphrodite, the
hapless youth, reclining in the lap of his leman, holds a
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
branch, which has been taken to signify that he, too, by the
help of the mystic bough, might yet be brought back from
the gates of death to life and love.<note place='foot'>The sarcophagus is in the Lateran
Museum at Rome. See W. Helbig,
<hi rend='italic'>Führer durch die öffentlichen Sammlungen
Klassischer Altertümer in Rom</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Leipsic, 1899), ii. 468.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Trees
thought by
the savage
to be the
seat of fire
because he
elicits it by
friction
from their
wood.</note>
Now, too, we can conjecture why Virbius at Nemi came
to be confounded with the sun.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> If Virbius was, as I have
tried to shew, a tree-spirit, he must have been the spirit of
the oak on which grew the Golden Bough; for tradition
represented him as the first of the Kings of the Wood. As
an oak-spirit he must have been supposed periodically to
rekindle the sun's fire, and might therefore easily be confounded
with the sun itself. Similarly we can explain why
Balder, an oak-spirit, was described as <q>so fair of face and
so shining that a light went forth from him,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Edda</hi>, übersetzt von K.
Simrock<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi> (Stuttgart, 1882), p. 264.</note> and why he
should have been so often taken to be the sun. And in
general we may say that in primitive society, when the only
known way of making fire is by the friction of wood, the
savage must necessarily conceive of fire as a property stored
away, like sap or juice, in trees, from which he has laboriously
to extract it. The Senal Indians of California <q>profess
to believe that the whole world was once a globe of fire,
whence that element passed up into the trees, and now
comes out whenever two pieces of wood are rubbed
together.</q><note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>
(Washington, 1877), p. 171.</note> Similarly the Maidu Indians of California hold
that <q>the earth was primarily a globe of molten matter, and
from that the principle of fire ascended through the roots
into the trunk and branches of trees, whence the Indians can
extract it by means of their drill.</q><note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>,
p. 287.</note> In Namoluk, one of
the Caroline Islands, they say that the art of making fire
was taught men by the gods. Olofaet, the cunning master
of flames, gave fire to the bird <foreign rend='italic'>mwi</foreign> and bade him carry it to
earth in his bill. So the bird flew from tree to tree and
stored away the slumbering force of the fire in the wood,
from which men can elicit it by friction.<note place='foot'>Max Girschner, <q>Die Karolineninsel
Namöluk und ihre Bewohner,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Baessler-Archiv</hi>, ii. (1912) p. 141.</note> In the ancient
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
Vedic hymns of India the fire-god Agni <q>is spoken of as
born in wood, as the embryo of plants, or as distributed in
plants. He is also said to have entered into all plants or
to strive after them. When he is called the embryo of trees
or of trees as well as plants, there may be a side-glance at
the fire produced in forests by the friction of the boughs of
trees.</q><note place='foot'>A. A. Macdonell, <hi rend='italic'>Vedic Mythology</hi>
(Strasburg, 1897), pp. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, referring
to <hi rend='italic'>Rigveda</hi>, vi. 3. 3, x. 79. 7, ii. 1.
14, iii. 1. 13, x. 1. 2, viii. 43. 9, i.
70. 4, ii. 1. 1. Compare H. Oldenberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Religion des Veda</hi> (Berlin,
1894), pp. 120 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some Australian languages the words for wood
and fire are said to be the same.<note place='foot'>Edward M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian
Race</hi> (Melbourne and London, 1886-1887),
i. 9, 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Trees that
have been
struck by
lightning
are deemed
by the
savage to
be charged
with a
double
portion of
fire.</note>
A tree which has been struck by lightning is naturally
regarded by the savage as charged with a double or
triple portion of fire; for has he not seen the mighty
flash enter into the trunk with his own eyes? Hence
perhaps we may explain some of the many superstitious
beliefs concerning trees that have been struck by lightning.
Thus in the opinion of the Cherokee Indians <q>mysterious
properties attach to the wood of a tree which has been
struck by lightning, especially when the tree itself still
lives, and such wood enters largely into the secret compounds
of the conjurers. An ordinary person of the laity
will not touch it, for fear of having cracks come upon his
hands and feet, nor is it burned for fuel, for fear that lye
made from the ashes will cause consumption. In preparing
ballplayers for the contest, the medicine-man sometimes
burns splinters of it to coal, which he gives to the players to
paint themselves with, in order that they may be able to
strike their opponents with all the force of a thunderbolt.
Bark or wood from a tree struck by lightning, but still
green, is beaten up and put into the water in which seeds
are soaked before planting, to insure a good crop, but, on
the other hand, any lightning-struck wood thrown into the
field will cause the crop to wither, and it is believed to have
a bad effect even to go into the field immediately after
having been near such a tree.</q><note place='foot'>James Mooney, <q>Myths of the
Cherokee,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Annual Report
of the Bureau of American Ethnology</hi>,
Part i. (Washington, 1900) p. 422,
compare p. 435.</note> Apparently the Cherokees
imagine that when wood struck by lightning is soaked in
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
water the fierce heat of the slumbering fire in its veins is
tempered to a genial warmth, which promotes the growth
of the crops; but that when the force of the fire has not
been thus diluted it blasts the growing corn. When the
Thompson Indians of British Columbia wished to set fire to
the houses of their enemies, they shot at them arrows which
were either made from a tree that had been struck by lightning
or had splinters of such wood attached to them.<note place='foot'>James Teit, <hi rend='italic'>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia</hi>, p. 346 (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup
North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of
the American Museum of Natural History</hi>,
April, 1900).</note> They
seem to have thought that wood struck by lightning was so
charged with fire that it would ignite whatever it struck, the
mere concussion sufficing to explode it like gunpowder. Yet
curiously enough these Indians supposed that if they burned
the wood of trees that had been struck by lightning, the
weather would immediately turn cold.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 374.</note> Perhaps they conceived
such trees as reservoirs of heat, and imagined that by
using them up they would exhaust the supply and thus
lower the temperature of the atmosphere.<note place='foot'>The Shuswap Indians of British
Columbia entertain a similar belief.
It has been suggested that the fancy may
be based on the observation that cold
follows a thunder-storm. See G. M.
Dawson, <q>Notes on the Shuswap
people of British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions
of the Royal Society of Canada</hi>,
ix. (1891) Section ii. p. 38.</note> Wendish peasants
of Saxony similarly refuse to burn in their stoves the wood
of trees that have been struck by lightning; but the reason
they give for their refusal is different. They say that with such
fuel the house would be burnt down.<note place='foot'>R. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Sächsische Volkskunde</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Dresden, 1901), p. 369.</note> No doubt they think
that the electric flash, inherent in the wood, would send such a
roaring flame up the chimney that nothing could stand before
it. In like manner the Thonga of South Africa will not use
such wood as fuel nor warm themselves at a fire which has
been kindled with it; but what danger they apprehend from
the wood we are not told.<note place='foot'>Henri A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>The Life of a
South African Tribe</hi> (Neuchatel, 1912-1913),
ii. 291. The Thonga imagine
that lightning is caused by a great bird,
which sometimes buries itself in the
ground to a depth of several feet. See
H. A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On the contrary, when lightning
sets fire to a tree, the Winamwanga of Northern Rhodesia
put out all the fires in the village and plaster the fireplaces
afresh, while the head men convey the lightning-kindled fire
to the chief, who prays over it. The chief then sends out
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
the new fire to all his villages, and the villagers reward his
messengers for the boon. This shews that they look upon
fire kindled by lightning with reverence, and the reverence is
intelligible, for they speak of thunder and lightning as God
himself coming down to earth.<note place='foot'>Dr. James A. Chisholm (of the
Livingstonia Mission, Mwenzo, N.E.
Rhodesia), <q>Notes on the Manners
and Customs of the Winamwanga and
Wiwa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the African Society</hi>,
No. 36 (July, 1910), p. 363.</note> Similarly the Maidu
Indians of California believe that a Great Man created the
world and all its inhabitants, and that lightning is nothing
but the Great Man himself descending swiftly out of heaven
and rending the trees with his flaming arm.<note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>
(Washington, 1877), p. 287. The
dread of lightning is prominent in some
of the customs observed in Patiko, a
district of the Uganda Protectorate.
If a village has suffered from lightning,
ropes made of twisted grass are strung
from peak to peak of the houses to ward
off further strokes. And if a person
has been struck or badly shaken, <q>an
elaborate cure is performed upon him.
A red cock is taken, his tongue torn
out, and his body dashed upon the
house where the stroke fell. Then the
scene changes to the bank of a small
running stream, where the patient is
made to kneel while the bird is sacrificed
over the water. A raw egg is
next given to the patient to swallow,
and he is laid on his stomach and
encouraged to vomit. The lightning
is supposed to be vomited along with
the egg, and all ill effects prevented.</q>
See Rev. A. L. Kitching, <hi rend='italic'>On the
Backwaters of the Nile</hi> (London, 1912),
p. 263.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Theory
that the
sanctity
of the oak
and the
relation of
the tree to
the sky-god
were suggested
by
the frequency
with which
oaks are
struck by
lightning.</note>
It is a plausible theory that the reverence which the
ancient peoples of Europe paid to the oak, and the connexion
which they traced between the tree and their sky-god,<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 349 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
were derived from the much greater frequency with
which the oak appears to be struck by lightning than any
other tree of our European forests. Some remarkable
statistics have been adduced in support of this view by
Mr. W. Warde Fowler.<note place='foot'>W. Warde Fowler, <q>The Oak
and the Thunder-god,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für
Religionswissenschaft</hi>, xvi. (1913) pp.
318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> My friend Mr. Warde Fowler
had previously called my attention to
the facts in a letter dated September
17th, 1912.</note> Observations, annually made in
the forests of Lippe-Detmold for seventeen years, yielded
the result that while the woods were mainly stocked with
beech and only to a small extent with oak and Scotch
pine, yet far more oaks and Scotch pines were struck by
lightning than beeches, the number of stricken Scotch pines
exceeding the number of stricken beeches in the proportion
of thirty-seven to one, and the number of stricken oaks
exceeding the number of stricken beeches in the proportion
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
of no less than sixty to one. Similar results have been
obtained from observations made in French and Bavarian
forests.<note place='foot'>Dr. W. Schlich's <hi rend='italic'>Manual of
Forestry</hi>, vol. iv. <hi rend='italic'>Forest Protection</hi>, by
W. R. Fisher, Second Edition (London,
1907), pp. 662 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Mr. W. Warde
Fowler was the first to call the attention
of mythologists to this work.</note> In short, it would seem from statistics compiled by
scientific observers, who have no mythological theories to
maintain, that the oak suffers from the stroke of lightning
far oftener than any other forest tree in Europe. However
we may explain it, whether by the easier passage of electricity
through oakwood than through any other timber,<note place='foot'>Experiments on the conductivity
of electricity in wood go to shew that
starchy trees (oak, poplar, maples, ash,
elm, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sorbus</foreign>) are good conductors, that
oily trees (beech, walnut, birch, lime)
are bad conductors, and that the conifers
are intermediate, the Scotch pine in
summer being as deficient in oil as the
starchy trees, but rich in oil during
winter. It was found that a single
turn of Holz's electric machine sufficed
to send the spark through oakwood,
but that from twelve to twenty turns
were required to send it through beech-wood.
Five turns of the machine were
needed to send the spark through
poplar and willow wood. See Dr. W.
Schlich, <hi rend='italic'>Manual of Forestry</hi>, vol. iv.
<hi rend='italic'>Forest Protection</hi>, Second Edition (London,
1907), p. 664. In the tropics
lightning is said to be especially
attracted to coco-nut palms. See
P. Amaury Talbot, <hi rend='italic'>In the Shadow of
the Bush</hi> (London, 1913), p. 73.</note> or in some
other way, the fact itself may well have attracted the notice
of our rude forefathers, who dwelt in the vast forests which
then covered a large part of Europe; and they might
naturally account for it in their simple religious way by
supposing that the great sky-god, whom they worshipped
and whose awful voice they heard in the roll of thunder,
loved the oak above all the trees of the wood and often
descended into it from the murky cloud in a flash of lightning,
leaving a token of his presence or of his passage in the riven
and blackened trunk and the blasted foliage. Such trees
would thenceforth be encircled by a nimbus of glory as
the visible seats of the thundering sky-god. Certain it is
that, like some savages, both Greeks and Romans identified
their great god of the sky and of the oak with the lightning
flash which struck the ground; and they regularly enclosed
such a stricken spot and treated it thereafter as sacred.<note place='foot'>As to the Greek belief and custom,
see H. Usener, <hi rend='italic'>Kleine Schriften</hi>, iv.
(Leipsic and Berlin, 1913), <q>Keraunos,</q>
pp. 471 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art
and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 361.
As to the Roman belief and custom,
see Festus, <hi rend='italic'>svv.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Fulguritum and Provorsum
fulgur</hi>, pp. 92, 229, ed. C. O.
Müller (Leipsic, 1839); H. Dessau,
<hi rend='italic'>Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</hi>, vol. ii.
pars i. (Berlin, 1902) pp. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
Nos. 3048-3056; L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische
Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Berlin, 1881-1883), i.
190-193; G. Wissowa, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und
Kultus der Römer</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Munich, 1912),
pp. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> By a curious refinement
the Romans referred lightning which
fell by day to Jupiter, but lightning
which fell by night to a god called
Summanus (Festus, p. 229).</note> It
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
is not rash to suppose that the ancestors of the Celts and
Germans in the forests of Central Europe paid a like respect
for like reasons to a blasted oak.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>This explanation
of the
Aryan worship
of the
oak is preferable
to
the one
formerly
adopted by
the author.</note>
This explanation of the Aryan reverence for the oak
and of the association of the tree with the great god of
the thunder and the sky, was suggested or implied long
ago by Jacob Grimm,<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
iii. 64, citing a statement that lightning
strikes twenty oaks for one beech.
The statistics adduced by Mr. W.
Warde Fowler seem to shew that this
statement is no exaggeration but rather
the contrary.</note> and has been of late powerfully
reinforced by Mr. W. Warde Fowler.<note place='foot'>W. Warde Fowler, <q>The Oak
and the Thunder-god,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für
Religionswissenschaft</hi>, xvi. (1913) pp.
317-320.</note> It appears to be
simpler and more probable than the explanation which I
formerly adopted, namely, that the oak was worshipped
primarily for the many benefits which our rude forefathers
derived from the tree, particularly for the fire which they
drew by friction from its wood; and that the connexion of
the oak with the sky was an after-thought based on the
belief that the flash of lightning was nothing but the spark
which the sky-god up aloft elicited by rubbing two pieces
of oak wood against each other, just as his savage worshipper
kindled fire in the forest on earth.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 356 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On that theory the god
of the thunder and the sky was derived from the original
god of the oak; on the present theory, which I now prefer,
the god of the sky and the thunder was the great original
deity of our Aryan ancestors, and his association with the
oak was merely an inference based on the frequency with
which the oak was seen to be struck by lightning. If the
Aryans, as some think, roamed the wide steppes of Russia
or Central Asia with their flocks and herds before they
plunged into the gloom of the European forests, they
may have worshipped the god of the blue or cloudy
firmament and the flashing thunderbolt long before they
thought of associating him with the blasted oaks in their
new home.<note place='foot'>The suggestion is Mr. W. Warde
Fowler's (<hi rend='italic'>op cit.</hi> pp. 319 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The sacredness
of
mistletoe
was perhaps
due to
a belief that
the plant
fell on the
tree in a
flash of
lightning.</note>
Perhaps the new theory has the further advantage of
throwing light on the special sanctity ascribed to mistletoe
which grows on an oak. The mere rarity of such a growth
on an oak hardly suffices to explain the extent and the
persistence of the superstition. A hint of its real origin is
possibly furnished by the statement of Pliny that the Druids
worshipped the plant because they believed it to have fallen
from heaven and to be a token that the tree on which it
grew was chosen by the god himself.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Natur. Hist.</hi> xvi. 249.</note> Can they have thought
that the mistletoe dropped on the oak in a flash of lightning?
The conjecture is confirmed by the name thunder-besom which
is applied to mistletoe in the Swiss canton of Aargau,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>.</note> for
the epithet clearly implies a close connexion between the
parasite and the thunder; indeed <q>thunder-besom</q> is a
popular name in Germany for any bushy nest-like excrescence
growing on a branch, because such a parasitic growth is
actually believed by the ignorant to be a product of lightning.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
i. 153. See above, p. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>.</note>
If there is any truth in this conjecture, the real reason why
the Druids worshipped a mistletoe-bearing oak above all
other trees of the forest was a belief that every such oak had
not only been struck by lightning but bore among its branches
a visible emanation of the celestial fire; so that in cutting
the mistletoe with mystic rites they were securing for themselves
all the magical properties of a thunderbolt. If that
was so, we must apparently conclude that the mistletoe was
deemed an emanation of the lightning rather than, as I have
thus far argued, of the midsummer sun. Perhaps, indeed, we
might combine the two seemingly divergent views by supposing
that in the old Aryan creed the mistletoe descended
from the sun on Midsummer Day in a flash of lightning. But
such a combination is artificial and unsupported, so far as I
know, by any positive evidence. Whether on mythical principles
the two interpretations can really be reconciled with
each other or not, I will not presume to say; but even should
they prove to be discrepant, the inconsistency need not have
prevented our rude forefathers from embracing both of them
at the same time with an equal fervour of conviction; for
like the great majority of mankind the savage is above being
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
hidebound by the trammels of a pedantic logic. In attempting
to track his devious thought through the jungle
of crass ignorance and blind fear, we must always remember
that we are treading enchanted ground, and must beware of
taking for solid realities the cloudy shapes that cross our
path or hover and gibber at us through the gloom. We
can never completely replace ourselves at the standpoint of
primitive man, see things with his eyes, and feel our hearts
beat with the emotions that stirred his. All our theories
concerning him and his ways must therefore fall far short of
certainty; the utmost we can aspire to in such matters is a
reasonable degree of probability.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence the
stroke of
mistletoe
that killed
Balder may
have been a
stroke of
lightning.</note>
To conclude these enquiries we may say that if Balder
was indeed, as I have conjectured, a personification of a
mistletoe-bearing oak, his death by a blow of the mistletoe
might on the new theory be explained as a death by a
stroke of lightning. So long as the mistletoe, in which the
flame of the lightning smouldered, was suffered to remain
among the boughs, so long no harm could befall the good
and kindly god of the oak, who kept his life stowed away for
safety between earth and heaven in the mysterious parasite;
but when once that seat of his life, or of his death, was
torn from the branch and hurled at the trunk, the tree
fell&mdash;the god died&mdash;smitten by a thunderbolt.<note place='foot'>This interpretation of Balder's
death was anticipated by W. Schwartz
(<hi rend='italic'>Der Ursprung der Mythologie</hi>, Berlin,
1860, p. 176), who cut the whole
knot by dubbing Balder <q>the German
thunder-and-lightning god</q> and mistletoe
<q>the wonderful thunder-and-lightning
flower.</q> But as this learned writer
nursed a fatal passion for thunder and
lightning, which he detected lurking
in the most unlikely places, we need
not wonder that he occasionally found
it in places where there were some
slight grounds for thinking that it
really existed.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The King
of the
Wood and
the Golden
Bough.</note>
And what we have said of Balder in the oak forests of
Scandinavia may perhaps, with all due diffidence in a question
so obscure and uncertain, be applied to the priest of Diana,
the King of the Wood, at Aricia in the oak forests of Italy.
He may have personated in flesh and blood the great Italian
god of the sky, Jupiter,<note place='foot'>On the relation of the priest to
Jupiter, and the equivalence of Jupiter
and Juno to Janus (Dianus) and Diana,
see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 376 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> who had kindly come down from
heaven in the lightning flash to dwell among men in the
mistletoe&mdash;the thunder-besom&mdash;the Golden Bough&mdash;growing
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
on the sacred oak beside the still waters of the lake of Nemi.
If that was so, we need not wonder that the priest guarded
with drawn sword the mystic bough which contained the
god's life and his own. The goddess whom he served and
married was herself, if I am right, no other than the Queen
of Heaven, the true wife of the sky-god. For she, too, loved
the solitude of the woods and the lonely hills, and sailing
overhead on clear nights in the likeness of the silver moon
she looked down with pleasure on her own fair image
reflected on the calm, the burnished surface of the lake,
Diana's Mirror.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIII. Farewell to Nemi.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Looking
back at the
end of the
journey.</note>
We are at the end of our enquiry, but as often happens
in the search after truth, if we have answered one question,
we have raised many more; if we have followed one track
home, we have had to pass by others that opened off it and
led, or seemed to lead, to far other goals than the sacred
grove at Nemi. Some of these paths we have followed a
little way; others, if fortune should be kind, the writer and
the reader may one day pursue together. For the present
we have journeyed far enough together, and it is time to
part. Yet before we do so, we may well ask ourselves
whether there is not some more general conclusion, some
lesson, if possible, of hope and encouragement, to be drawn
from the melancholy record of human error and folly which
has engaged our attention in these volumes.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
movement
of human
thought
in the past
from magic
to religion.</note>
If then we consider, on the one hand, the essential
similarity of man's chief wants everywhere and at all times,
and on the other hand, the wide difference between the
means he has adopted to satisfy them in different ages, we
shall perhaps be disposed to conclude that the movement of
the higher thought, so far as we can trace it, has on the
whole been from magic through religion to science. In
magic man depends on his own strength to meet the
difficulties and dangers that beset him on every side. He
believes in a certain established order of nature on which he
can surely count, and which he can manipulate for his own
ends. When he discovers his mistake, when he recognizes
sadly that both the order of nature which he had assumed
and the control which he had believed himself to exercise
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
over it were purely imaginary, he ceases to rely on his own
intelligence and his own unaided efforts, and throws himself
humbly on the mercy of certain great invisible beings
behind the veil of nature, to whom he now ascribes all those
far-reaching powers which he once arrogated to himself.
Thus in the acuter minds magic is gradually superseded by
religion, which explains the succession of natural phenomena
as regulated by the will, the passion, or the caprice of
spiritual beings like man in kind, though vastly superior to
him in power.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
movement
of thought
from
religion
to science.</note>
But as time goes on this explanation in its turn proves
to be unsatisfactory. For it assumes that the succession of
natural events is not determined by immutable laws, but is
to some extent variable and irregular, and this assumption
is not borne out by closer observation. On the contrary,
the more we scrutinize that succession the more we are
struck by the rigid uniformity, the punctual precision with
which, wherever we can follow them, the operations of nature
are carried on. Every great advance in knowledge has
extended the sphere of order and correspondingly restricted
the sphere of apparent disorder in the world, till now we
are ready to anticipate that even in regions where chance
and confusion appear still to reign, a fuller knowledge
would everywhere reduce the seeming chaos to cosmos.
Thus the keener minds, still pressing forward to a deeper
solution of the mysteries of the universe, come to reject the
religious theory of nature as inadequate, and to revert in a
measure to the older standpoint of magic by postulating
explicitly, what in magic had only been implicitly assumed,
to wit, an inflexible regularity in the order of natural events,
which, if carefully observed, enables us to foresee their course
with certainty and to act accordingly. In short, religion,
regarded as an explanation of nature, is displaced by science.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Contrast
between
the views
of natural
order
postulated
by magic
and by
science
respectively.</note>
But while science has this much in common with
magic that both rest on a faith in order as the underlying
principle of all things, readers of this work will hardly
need to be reminded that the order presupposed by
magic differs widely from that which forms the basis of
science. The difference flows naturally from the different
modes in which the two orders have been reached. For
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
whereas the order on which magic reckons is merely an
extension, by false analogy, of the order in which ideas
present themselves to our minds, the order laid down by
science is derived from patient and exact observation of the
phenomena themselves. The abundance, the solidity, and
the splendour of the results already achieved by science are
well fitted to inspire us with a cheerful confidence in the
soundness of its method. Here at last, after groping about
in the dark for countless ages, man has hit upon a clue to
the labyrinth, a golden key that opens many locks in the
treasury of nature. It is probably not too much to say that
the hope of progress&mdash;moral and intellectual as well as
material&mdash;in the future is bound up with the fortunes of
science, and that every obstacle placed in the way of scientific
discovery is a wrong to humanity.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The scientific
theory
of the
world not
necessarily
final.</note>
Yet the history of thought should warn us against
concluding that because the scientific theory of the world
is the best that has yet been formulated, it is necessarily
complete and final. We must remember that at bottom
the generalizations of science or, in common parlance,
the laws of nature are merely hypotheses devised to
explain that ever-shifting phantasmagoria of thought
which we dignify with the high-sounding names of the
world and the universe. In the last analysis magic,
religion, and science are nothing but theories of thought;
and as science has supplanted its predecessors, so it may
hereafter be itself superseded by some more perfect hypothesis,
perhaps by some totally different way of looking at
the phenomena&mdash;of registering the shadows on the screen&mdash;of
which we in this generation can form no idea. The
advance of knowledge is an infinite progression towards a
goal that for ever recedes. We need not murmur at the
endless pursuit:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Fatti non foste a viver come bruti</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Ma per seguir virtute e conoscenza.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
shadow
across the
path.</note>
Great things will come of that pursuit, though we may not
enjoy them. Brighter stars will rise on some voyager of
the future&mdash;some great Ulysses of the realms of thought&mdash;than
shine on us. The dreams of magic may one day be
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
the waking realities of science. But a dark shadow lies
athwart the far end of this fair prospect. For however vast
the increase of knowledge and of power which the future
may have in store for man, he can scarcely hope to stay
the sweep of those great forces which seem to be making
silently but relentlessly for the destruction of all this starry
universe in which our earth swims as a speck or mote. In
the ages to come man may be able to predict, perhaps even
to control, the wayward courses of the winds and clouds,
but hardly will his puny hands have strength to speed
afresh our slackening planet in its orbit or rekindle the
dying fire of the sun.<note place='foot'><q>I quite agree how humiliating
the slow progress of man is, but every
one has his own pet horror, and this
slow progress or even personal annihilation
sinks in my mind into insignificance
compared with the idea or
rather I presume certainty of the sun
some day cooling and we all freezing.
To think of the progress of millions of
years, with every continent swarming
with good and enlightened men, all
ending in this, and with probably no
fresh start until this our planetary
system has been again converted into
red-hot gas. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sic transit gloria mundi</foreign>,
with a vengeance</q> (<hi rend='italic'>More Letters of
Charles Darwin</hi>, edited by Francis
Darwin, London, 1903, i. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> Yet the philosopher who trembles
at the idea of such distant catastrophes may console himself
by reflecting that these gloomy apprehensions, like the
earth and the sun themselves, are only parts of that unsubstantial
world which thought has conjured up out of the
void, and that the phantoms which the subtle enchantress
has evoked to-day she may ban to-morrow. They too, like
so much that to common eyes seems solid, may melt into
air, into thin air.<note place='foot'>Since this passage was written the
hope which it expresses has been to
some extent strengthened by the discovery
of radium, which appears to
prolong indefinitely the prospect of the
duration of the sun's heat, and with it
the duration of life on its attendant
planets. See (Sir) George Howard
Darwin's Presidential Address to the
British Association, <hi rend='italic'>Report of the 75th
Meeting of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science</hi> (South
Africa, 1905), pp. 28 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. Soddy,
<hi rend='italic'>The Interpretation of Radium</hi>, Third
Edition (London, 1912), pp. 240 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
E. Rutherford, <hi rend='italic'>Radio-active Substances
and their Radiations</hi> (Cambridge,
1913), pp. 653-656. At the same
time it should be borne in mind that
even if the atomic disintegration and
accompanying liberation of energy,
which characterize radium and kindred
elements, should prove to be common
in different degrees to all the other
elements and to form a vast and till
lately unsuspected store of heat to the
sun, this enormous reserve of fuel
would only defer but could not avert
that final catastrophe with which the
solar system and indeed the whole
universe is remorselessly threatened by
the law of the dissipation of energy.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The web
of thought.</note>
Without dipping so far into the future, we may illustrate
the course which thought has hitherto run by likening it to
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
a web woven of three different threads&mdash;the black thread of
magic, the red thread of religion, and the white thread of
science, if under science we may include those simple truths,
drawn from observation of nature, of which men in all
ages have possessed a store. Could we then survey the
web of thought from the beginning, we should probably
perceive it to be at first a chequer of black and white, a
patchwork of true and false notions, hardly tinged as yet by
the red thread of religion. But carry your eye further
along the fabric and you will remark that, while the black
and white chequer still runs through it, there rests on the
middle portion of the web, where religion has entered most
deeply into its texture, a dark crimson stain, which shades
off insensibly into a lighter tint as the white thread of
science is woven more and more into the tissue. To a web
thus chequered and stained, thus shot with threads of
diverse hues, but gradually changing colour the farther it is
unrolled, the state of modern thought, with all its divergent
aims and conflicting tendencies, may be compared. Will
the great movement which for centuries has been slowly
altering the complexion of thought be continued in the near
future? or will a reaction set in which may arrest progress
and even undo much that has been done? To keep up
our parable, what will be the colour of the web which the
Fates are now weaving on the humming loom of time? will
it be white or red? We cannot tell. A faint glimmering
light illumines the backward portion of the web. Clouds
and thick darkness hide the other end.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Nemi
at evening:
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ave
Maria</foreign> bell.</note>
Our long voyage of discovery is over and our bark has
drooped her weary sails in port at last. Once more we take
the road to Nemi. It is evening, and as we climb the long
slope of the Appian Way up to the Alban Hills, we look
back and see the sky aflame with sunset, its golden glory
resting like the aureole of a dying saint over Rome and
touching with a crest of fire the dome of St. Peter's. The
sight once seen can never be forgotten, but we turn from it
and pursue our way darkling along the mountain side, till
we come to Nemi and look down on the lake in its deep
hollow, now fast disappearing in the evening shadows. The
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
place has changed but little since Diana received the homage
of her worshippers in the sacred grove. The temple of the
sylvan goddess, indeed, has vanished and the King of the
Wood no longer stands sentinel over the Golden Bough.
But Nemi's woods are still green, and as the sunset fades
above them in the west, there comes to us, borne on the
swell of the wind, the sound of the church bells of Ariccia
ringing the Angelus. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ave Maria!</foreign> Sweet and solemn they
chime out from the distant town and die lingeringly away
across the wide Campagnan marshes. <foreign rend='italic'>Le roi est mort, vive
le roi! Ave Maria!</foreign>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Notes.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Snake Stones.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note></head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Snake
Stones
in the
Highlands.</note>
The belief of the Scottish Highlanders as to the so-called Snake
Stones has been recorded as follows by a good authority at the end
of the nineteenth century:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>A product called <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>clach-nathrach</foreign>, serpent stone, is found on the
root of the long ling. It is of steel-grey colour, has the consistency
of soft putty when new and of hard putty when old, and is as light
as pumice-stone, which it resembles. It is of a globular form, and
from one to three inches in diameter. There is a circular hole,
about a quarter of an inch in width, through the centre. This
substance is said to be produced by the serpent emitting spume
round the root of a twig of heather. The <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>clach-nathrach</foreign> is greatly
prized by the people, who transmit it as a talisman to their
descendants.</q><note place='foot'>Alexander Carmichael, <hi rend='italic'>Carmina
Gadelica, Hymns and Incantations
with Illustrative Notes on Words,
Rites, and Customs, dying and obsolete:
orally collected in the Highlands
and Islands of Scotland and translated
into English</hi> (Edinburgh, 1900), ii.
312.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Transformation of Witches Into Cats.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Witches
as cats
among the
Oraons.</note>
The European belief that witches can turn themselves into cats,
and that any wounds inflicted on the witch-cat will afterwards be
found on the body of the witch herself,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 315 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> has its exact parallel
among the Oraons or Uraons, a primitive hill tribe of Bengal.
The following is the account given of the Oraon belief by a Jesuit
missionary, who laboured for years among these savages and was
intimately acquainted with their superstitions:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>

<p>
<q><foreign rend='italic'>Chordewa</foreign> is a witch rather than a <foreign rend='italic'>bhut</foreign> [demon]. It is
believed that some women have the power to change their soul
into a black cat, who then goes about in the houses where there
are sick people. Such a cat has a peculiar way of mewing quite
different from its brethren, and is easily recognised. It steals
quietly into the house, licks the lips of the sick man and eats of
the food that has been prepared for him. The sick man soon gets
worse and dies. They say it is very difficult to catch the cat, as it
has all the nimbleness of its nature and the cleverness of a <foreign rend='italic'>bhut</foreign>.
However, they sometimes succeed, and then something wonderful
happens. The woman out of whom the cat has come remains
insensible, as it were in a state of temporary death, until the cat
re-enters her body. Any wound inflicted on the cat will be inflicted
on her; if they cut its ears or break its legs or put out its eyes
the woman will suffer the same mutilation. The Uraons say that
formerly they used to burn any woman that was suspected to be a
<foreign rend='italic'>Chordewa</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>The late Rev. P. Dehon, S.J.,
<q>Religion and Customs of the
Uraons,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal</hi>, vol. i. No. 9
(Calcutta, 1906), p. 141.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. African Balders.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>African
parallels
to Balder.</note>
In various parts of Africa stories are told of men who could only
be killed, like Balder, by the stroke of an apparently insignificant
weapon; and some at least of these men were not mythical beings
but real men of flesh and blood who lived not long ago and whose
memory is still comparatively fresh among their people. The
Wadoe of German East Africa tell such a story of a great sorcerer,
whom they now worship as a dispenser of sunshine and rain. The
legend and the worship are reported as follows by a native African
traveller:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
worshipful
ghost in
the cave.</note>
<q rend='pre'>If drought sets in, all the chiefs meet in council and resolve:
<q>This year we have had nothing but sunshine; when we plant, the
fruits will not ripen; therefore we must betake ourselves to our
spirits of the dead (<foreign rend='italic'>mizimu</foreign>).</q> Then they take some woollen stuff
dyed blue and a red cloth, and set out together on the way and go
to the district Nguu, where their principal ghost (<foreign rend='italic'>mzimu</foreign>) resides,
in order to lay the matter before him. The ghost dwells in a very
spacious cave. On their coming the chiefs greet him. His answer
consists in a humming noise, which sounds like the patter of rain.
If one among them is a bad man, the ghost says to them, <q>There
is come with you in the caravan a rascal who wears such and such
clothes.</q> If such a man there is, he is driven away. Now they
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
tell the ghost all that they wish to say, to wit: <q>This year thou
hast given us much sunshine; the fruits in the fields do not grow
tall, everywhere there is sickness, therefore we beg thee, give us
rain.</q> Thereupon the ghost hums a second time, and all are glad,
because he has answered them. But if the ghost is angry, he does
not answer but holds his peace. If he has made them glad and
given an answer, much rain will fall; otherwise they return as they
went in sunshine.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The man
who could
only be
killed by
the stalk
of a gourd.</note>
<q>Originally this ghost was a man, a village elder (<foreign rend='italic'>jumbe</foreign>) of
Ukami. He was a great sorcerer. One day people wished to
conquer him, but they could do him no harm, for neither lead nor
sword nor arrow could pierce his body. But he lived at strife with
his wife. She said to his enemies, <q>If you would kill my husband,
I will tell you how it can be done.</q> They asked her, <q>How can
it be done?</q> She answered, <q>My husband is a great sorcerer;
you all know that.</q> They answered, <q>That is true.</q> Then she
said further, <q>If you would kill him so that he dies on the spot,
seek a stalk of a gourd and smite him with it; then he will
die at once, for that has always been to him a forbidden thing.</q><note place='foot'><q>Every clan (<foreign rend='italic'>Familienstamm</foreign>) has
a definite thing which is forbidden to
all the members of the clan, whether
it be a particular kind of meat, or a
certain fish, or as here the stalk of a
gourd.</q></note>
They sought the stalk of a gourd, and when they smote him with
it, he died at once without so much as setting one foot from the
spot. But of him and his departure there was nothing more to
be seen, for suddenly a great storm blew, and no man knew
whither he had gone. The storm is said to have carried him to
that cave which is still there to this day. After some days people
saw in the cave his weapons, clothes, and turban lying, and they
brought word to the folk in the town, <q>We have seen the clothes of
the elder in the cave, but of himself we have perceived nothing.</q>
The folk went thither to look about, and they found that it was so.
So the news of this ghost spread, all the more because people had
seen the marvel that a man died and nobody knew where he
had gone. The wonderful thing in this wood is that the spirits
dwell in the midst of the wood and that everywhere a bright white
sand lies on the ground, as if people had gone thither for the
purpose of keeping everything clean. On many days they hear
a drumming and shouts of joy in this wood, as if a marriage
feast were being held there. That is the report about the ghost of
Kolelo.<note place='foot'><q>The place in Nguu, where the
ghost is said to dwell.</q></note> All village elders, who dwell in the interior, see in this
ghost the greatest ghost of all. All the chiefs (<foreign rend='italic'>mwene</foreign>) and headmen
(<foreign rend='italic'>pazi</foreign>) and the village elders (<foreign rend='italic'>jumben</foreign>) of the clan Kingaru<note place='foot'><q>In Ukami.</q></note>
respect that ghost.</q><note place='foot'>C. Velten, <hi rend='italic'>Schilderungen der
Suaheli</hi> (Göttingen, 1901), pp. 195-197.</note>
</p>

<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The man
who could
only be
killed by a
splinter of
bamboo.</note>
Miss Alice Werner, who kindly called my attention to this
and the following cases of African Balders, tells me that this
worshipful ghost in the cave appears to have been in his time
a real man. Again, she was assured by some natives that <q>Chikumbu,
a Yao chief, who at one time gave the Administration
some trouble, was invulnerable by shot or steel; the only thing
that could kill him&mdash;since he had not been fortified against it
by the proper medicine&mdash;was a sharp splinter of bamboo. This
reminds one of Balder and the mistletoe.</q><note place='foot'>Miss Alice Werner, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives
of British Central Africa</hi> (London,
1906), p. 82. In a letter Miss
Werner tells me that she learned these
particulars at Blantyre in 1893, and
that the chief lived in the neighbourhood
of Mlanje.</note> Again, a Nyanja chief
named Chibisa, who was a great man in this part of Africa when
Livingstone travelled in it,<note place='foot'>Rev. Henry Rowley, <hi rend='italic'>Twenty
Years in Central Africa</hi> (London,
N.D.), pp. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> For a reference to
this and all the other works cited in
this Note I am indebted to the kindness
of Miss Alice Werner.</note> <q>stood firm upon his ant-heap, while
his men fell round him, shouting his war-song, until one who knew
the secret of a sand-bullet brought him down.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. David Clement Scott, <hi rend='italic'>A
Cyclopaedic Dictionary of the Mang'anja
Language spoken in British Central
Africa</hi> (Edinburgh, 1892), p. 315.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The man
who could
only be
killed by
a copper
needle.</note>
Once more the Swahili tell a story of an African Samson
named Liongo who lived in Shanga, while it was a flourishing city.
By reason of his great strength he oppressed the people exceedingly,
and they sought to kill him, but all in vain. At last they bribed
his nephew, saying, <q>Go and ask your father what it is that will
kill him. When you know, come and tell us, and when he is dead
we will give you the kingdom.</q> So the treacherous nephew went
to his uncle and asked him, <q>Father, what is it that can kill you?</q>
And his uncle said, <q>A copper needle. If any one stabs me in the
navel, I die.</q> So the nephew went to the town and said to the
people, <q>It is a copper needle that will kill him.</q> And they gave
him a needle, and he went back to his uncle; and while his uncle
slept the wicked nephew stabbed him with the needle in the navel.
So he died, and they buried him, and his grave is to be seen
at Ozi to this day. But they seized the nephew and killed him;
they did not give the kingdom to that bad young man.<note place='foot'>Edward Steere, <hi rend='italic'>Swahili Tales</hi>
(London, 1870), pp. 441-453. The
young man in the story is spoken of
now as the nephew and now as the
son of the man he murdered. Probably
he was what we should call a
nephew or brother's son of his victim;
for under the classificatory system of
relationship, which seems to prevail
among the Bantu stock, to whom the
Swahili belong, a man regularly calls
his paternal uncle his father.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>These
stories
confirm the
view that
Balder may
have been
a real man
who was
deified
after death.</note>
When we compare the story of Balder with these African stories,
the heroes of which were probably all real men, and when further
we remember the similar tale told of the Persian hero Isfendiyar,
who may well have been an historical personage,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> we are confirmed
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
in the suspicion that Balder himself may have been a real man,
admired and beloved in his lifetime and deified after his death,
like the African sorcerer, who is now worshipped in a cave and
bestows rain or sunshine on his votaries. On the whole I incline
to regard this solution of the Balder problem as more probable than
the one I have advocated in the text, namely that Balder was a
mythical personification of a mistletoe-bearing oak. The facts
which seem to incline the balance to the side of Euhemerism
reached me as my book was going to press and too late to be
embodied in their proper place in the volumes. The acceptance
of this hypothesis would not necessarily break the analogy which I
have traced between Balder in his sacred grove on the Sogne fiord
of Norway and the priest of Diana in the sacred grove of Nemi;
indeed, it might even be thought rather to strengthen the
resemblance between the two, since there is no doubt at all that
the priests of Diana at Nemi were men who lived real lives and
died real deaths.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. The Mistletoe and the Golden Bough.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Two
species
of mistletoe,
the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum
album</foreign>
and the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus
europaeus</foreign>.
Common
mistletoe
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum
album</foreign>).</note>
That Virgil compares the Golden Bough to the mistletoe<note place='foot'><p>Virgil, Aen. vi. 205 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Quale solet silvis brumali frigore viscum<lb/>
Fronde virere nova, quod non sua seminat arbos,<lb/>
Et croceo fetu teretis circumdare truncos:<lb/>
Talis erat species auri frondentis opaca<lb/>
Ilice, sic leni crepitabat bractea vento.</hi></q>
</p></note> is
certain and admitted on all hands. The only doubt that can arise
is whether the plant to which he compares the mystic bough is the
ordinary species of mistletoe (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum album</foreign>) or the species known
to botanists as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus europaeus</foreign>. The common mistletoe (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum
album</foreign>, L.) <q>lives as a semi-parasite (obtaining carbon from the air,
but water, nitrogen, and mineral matter from the sap of its host) on
many conifers and broadleaved trees, and chiefly on their branches.
The hosts, or trees on which it lives, are, <emph>most frequently</emph>, the apple
tree, both wild and cultivated varieties; next, the silver-fir; <emph>frequently</emph>,
birches, poplars (except aspen), limes, willows, Scots pine,
mountain-ash, and hawthorn; <emph>occasionally</emph>, robinia, maples, horse-chestnut,
hornbeam, and aspen. It is very rarely found on oaks,
but has been observed on pedunculate oak at Thornbury, Gloucestershire,
and elsewhere in Europe, also on <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quercus coccinea</foreign>, Moench.,
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Q. palustris</foreign>, Moench. The alders, beech and spruce appear
to be always free from mistletoe, and it very rarely attacks pear-trees.
It is commoner in Southern Europe than in the North,
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
and is extremely abundant where cider is made. In the N.-W.
Himalayan districts, it is frequently found on apricot-trees, which
are the commonest fruit-trees there. Its white berries are eaten by
birds, chiefly by the missel-thrush (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Turdus viscivorus</foreign>, L.), and the
seeds are either rubbed by the beak against branches of trees, or
voided on to them; the seeds, owing to the viscous nature of the
pulp surrounding them, then become attached to the branches.</q><note place='foot'>W. Schlich, <hi rend='italic'>Manual of Forestry</hi>,
vol. iv. <hi rend='italic'>Forest Protection</hi>, by W. R.
Fisher, M.A., Second Edition (London,
1907), p. 412. French peasants about
Coulommiers think that mistletoe
springs from birds' dung. See H.
Gaidoz, <q>Bulletin critique de la Mythologie
Gauloise,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de l'Histoire
des Religions</hi>, ii. (1880) p. 76. The
ancients were well aware that mistletoe
is propagated from tree to tree by seeds
which have been voided by birds. See
Theophrastus, <hi rend='italic'>De Causis Plantarum</hi>,
ii. 17. 5; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Naturalis Historia</hi>,
xvi. 247. Pliny tells us that the birds
which most commonly deposited the
seeds were pigeons and thrushes. Can
this have been the reason why Virgil
(<hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 190 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) represents Aeneas led
to the Golden Bough by a pair of doves?</note>
The large smooth pale-green tufts of the parasite, clinging to the
boughs of trees, are most conspicuous in winter, when they assume
a yellowish hue.<note place='foot'>James Sowerby, <hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>,
xxi. (London, 1805) p. 1470.</note> In Greece at the present time mistletoe grows
most commonly on firs, especially at a considerable elevation (three
thousand feet or more) above the level of the sea.<note place='foot'>C. Fraas, <hi rend='italic'>Synopsis Plantarum
Florae Classicae</hi> (Munich, 1845), p.
152.</note> Throughout
Italy mistletoe now grows on fruit-trees, almond-trees, hawthorn,
limes, willows, black poplars, and firs, but never, it is said, on oaks.<note place='foot'>H. O. Lenz, <hi rend='italic'>Botanik der alten
Griechen und Römer</hi> (Gotha, 1859), p.
597, quoting Pollini.</note>
In England seven authentic cases of mistletoe growing on oaks are
said to be reported.<note place='foot'>J. Lindley and T. Moore, <hi rend='italic'>The
Treasury of Botany</hi>, New Edition
(London, 1874), ii. 1220. A good
authority, however, observes that
mistletoe is <q>frequently to be observed
on the branches of old apple-trees,
hawthorns, lime-trees, oaks, etc., where
it grows parasitically.</q> See J. Sowerby,
<hi rend='italic'>English Botany</hi>, xxi. (London, 1805)
p. 1470.</note> In Gloucestershire mistletoe grows on the
Badham Court oak, Sedbury Park, Chepstow, and on the Frampton-on-Severn
oak.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Britannica</hi>, Ninth
Edition, x. 689, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Gloucester.</q></note> Branches of oak with mistletoe growing on them
were exhibited to more than one learned society in France during
the nineteenth century; one of the branches was cut in the forest of
Jeugny.<note place='foot'>H. Gaidoz, <q>Bulletin critique de
la Mythologie Gauloise,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de
l'Histoire des Religions</hi>, ii. (1880) pp.
75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is a popular French superstition that mandragora or
<q>the hand of glory,</q> as it is called by the people, may be found by
digging at the root of a mistletoe-bearing oak.<note place='foot'>Angelo de Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>La Mythologie
des Plantes</hi> (Paris, 1878-1882), ii.
216 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the many curious superstitions
that have clustered round
mandragora, see P. J. Veth, <q>De
Mandragora,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv
für Ethnographie</hi>, vii. (1894) pp. 199-205;
C. B. Randolph, <q>The Mandragora
of the Ancients in Folk-lore and
Medicine,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences</hi>, vol. xl.
No. 12 (January, 1905), pp. 487-537.</note>
</p>

<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus
europaeus.</foreign></note>
The species of mistletoe known as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus europaeus</foreign> resembles
the ordinary mistletoe in general appearance, but its berries are bright
yellow instead of white. <q>This species attacks chiefly oaks, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quercus
cerris</foreign>, L., <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Q. sessiliflora</foreign>, Salisb., less frequently, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Q. pedunculata</foreign>, Ehrh.,
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Castanea vulgaris</foreign>, Lam.; also lime. It is found throughout
Southern Europe and as far north as Saxony, not in Britain. It
grows chiefly on the branches of standards over coppice.</q> The
injury which it inflicts on its hosts is even greater than that inflicted
by the ordinary mistletoe; it often kills the branch on which it
settles. The seeds are carried to the trees by birds, chiefly by
the missel-thrush. In India many kinds of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> grow on
various species of forest trees, for example, on teak;<note place='foot'>W. Schlich, <hi rend='italic'>Manual of Forestry</hi>,
vol. iv. <hi rend='italic'>Forest Protection</hi>, Second
Edition (London, 1907), pp. 415-417.</note> one variety
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus vestitus</foreign>) grows on two species of oak, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quercus
dilatata</foreign>, Lindl., and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quercus incana</foreign>, Roxb.<note place='foot'>E. B. Stebbing, <q>The Loranthus
Parasite of the Moru and Ban Oaks,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal and Proceedings of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal</hi>, New Series, v.
(Calcutta, 1910) pp. 189-195. The
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus vestitus</foreign> <q>is a small branching
woody plant with dirty yellowish
green leaves which are dark shining
green above. It grows in great
clumps and masses on the trees, resembling
a giant mistletoe. The fruit
is yellowish and fleshy, and is almost
sessile on the stem, which it thickly
studs</q> (<hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>, p. 192). The writer
shews that the parasite is very destructive
to oaks in India.</note> A marked distinction
between the two sorts of mistletoe is that whereas ordinary
mistletoe (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum album</foreign>) is evergreen, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> is deciduous.<note place='foot'>H. O. Lenz, <hi rend='italic'>Botanik der alten
Griechen und Römer</hi> (Gotha, 1859), p.
598, notes 151 and 152.</note>
In Greece the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> has been observed on many old chestnut-trees
at Stheni, near Delphi.<note place='foot'>C. Fraas, <hi rend='italic'>Synopsis Plantarum
Florae Classicae</hi> (Munich, 1845), p. 152.</note> In Italy it grows chiefly on the various
species of oaks and also on chestnut-trees. So familiar is it on oaks
that it is known as <q>oak mistletoe</q> both in popular parlance (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>visco
quercino</foreign>) and in druggists' shops (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>viscum quernum</foreign>). Bird-lime is
made from it in Italy.<note place='foot'>H. O. Lenz, <hi rend='italic'>Botanik der alten
Griechen und Römer</hi> (Gotha, 1859),
pp. 599 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Both sorts
of mistletoe
known
to the
ancients
and designated
by
different
words.</note>
Both sorts of mistletoe were known to the ancient Greeks and
Romans, though the distinctive terms which they applied to each
appear not to be quite certain. Theophrastus, and Pliny after him,
seem to distinguish three sorts of mistletoe, to which Theophrastus
gives the names of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign>, <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>hyphear</foreign>, and <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>stelis</foreign> respectively. He says
that the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>hyphear</foreign> and the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>stelis</foreign> grow on firs and pines, and that the
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign> grows on the oak (δρῦς), the terebinth, and many other kinds
of trees. He also observes that both the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign> and the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>hyphear</foreign> grow
on the ilex or holm-oak (πρῖνος), the same tree sometimes bearing
both species at the same time, the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign> on the north and the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>hyphear</foreign>
on the south. He expressly distinguishes the evergreen species of
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign> from the deciduous, which seems to prove that he included
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
both the ordinary mistletoe (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum album</foreign>) and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> under
the general name of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Theophrastus, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Plantarum</hi>,
iii. 7. 5, iii. 16. 1, <hi rend='italic'>De Causis Plantarum</hi>,
ii. 17; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvi.
245-247. Compare Dioscorides, <hi rend='italic'>De
materia medica</hi>, ii. 93 (103), vol. i.
pp. 442 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ed. C. Sprengel (Leipsic,
1829-1830), who uses the form <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixos</foreign>
instead of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign>. Both Dioscorides (<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>)
and Plutarch (<hi rend='italic'>Coriolanus</hi>, 3) affirm that
mistletoe (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixos</foreign>) grows on the oak (δρῦς);
and Hesychius quotes from Sophocles's
play <hi rend='italic'>Meleager</hi> the expression <q>mistletoe-bearing
oaks</q> (ἰξοφόρους δρύας,
Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Doubts
as to the
identification
of the
ancient
names for
mistletoe.</note>
Modern writers are not agreed as to the identification of the
various species of mistletoe designated by the names <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign>, <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>hyphear</foreign>,
and <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>stelis</foreign>. F. Wimmer, the editor of Theophrastus in the Didot
edition, takes <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>hyphear</foreign> to be common mistletoe (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum album</foreign>),
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>stelis</foreign> to be <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus europaeus</foreign>, and <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign> to be a general name
which includes the two species.<note place='foot'>Theophrastus, <hi rend='italic'>Opera quae supersunt
omnia</hi>, ed. Fr. Wimmer (Paris,
1866), pp. 537, 545, 546, <hi rend='italic'>s.vv.</hi> ἰξία,
στελίς, ὑφέαρ.</note> On the other hand F. Fraas,
while he agrees as to the identification of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>hyphear</foreign> and <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>stelis</foreign> with
common mistletoe and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> respectively, inclines somewhat
hesitatingly to regard <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign> or <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixos</foreign> (as Dioscorides has it) as a
synonym for <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>stelis</foreign> (the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign>).<note place='foot'>F. Fraas, <hi rend='italic'>Synopsis Plantarum
Florae Classicae</hi> (Munich, 1845), p.
152.</note> H. O. Lenz, again, regards
both <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>hyphear</foreign> and <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>stelis</foreign> as synonyms for common mistletoe (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum
album</foreign>), while he would restrict <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign> to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign>.<note place='foot'>H. O. Lenz, <hi rend='italic'>Botanik der alten
Griechen und Römer</hi> (Gotha, 1859), p.
597, notes 147 and 148.</note> But both
these attempts to confine <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign> to the single deciduous species
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> seem incompatible with the statement of Theophrastus,
that <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ixia</foreign> includes an evergreen as well as a deciduous species.<note place='foot'>Theophrastus, <hi rend='italic'>De Causis Plantarum</hi>,
ii. 17. 2, ἐπεὶ τό γε τὴν μὲν
ἀείφυλλον εἶναι τῶν ἰξιῶν (τὴν δὲ φυλλοβόλον)
οὐθὲν ἄτοπον, κἂν ἡ μὲν
(ἐν) ἀιφύλλοις ἡ δὲ ἐν φυλλοβόλοις
ἐμβιῴη.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Did Virgil
compare
the Golden
Bough
to common
mistletoe
or to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign>?
Some
enquirers
decide
in favour
of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign>.</note>
We have now to ask, Did Virgil compare the Golden Bough to
the common mistletoe (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum album</foreign>) or to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus europaeus</foreign>?
Some modern enquirers decide in favour of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign>. Many
years ago Sir Francis Darwin wrote to me:<note place='foot'>His letter is undated, but the
postmark is April 28th, 1889. Sir
Francis Darwin has since told me that
his authority is Kerner von Marilaun,
<hi rend='italic'>Pflanzenleben</hi> (1888), vol. i. pp. 195,
196. See Anton Kerner von Marilaun,
<hi rend='italic'>The Natural History of Plants</hi>, translated
and edited by F. W. Oliver
(London, 1894-1895), i. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
According to this writer <q>the mistletoe's
favourite tree is certainly the
Black Poplar (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Populus nigra</foreign>). It
flourishes with astonishing luxuriance
on the branches of that tree....
Mistletoe has also been found by way
of exception upon the oak and the
maple, and upon old vines</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
i. 205).</note> <q>I wonder whether
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus europaeus</foreign> would do for your Golden Bough. It is a sort
of mistletoe growing on oaks and chestnuts in S. Europe. In
the autumn it produces what are described as bunches of pretty
yellow berries. It is not evergreen like the mistletoe, but
deciduous, and as its leaves appear at the same time as the oak
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
leaves and drop at the same time in autumn, it must look like a
branch of the oak, more especially as it has rough bark with lichens
often growing on it. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> is said to be a hundred years old
sometimes.</q> Professor P. J. Veth, after quoting the passage from
Virgil, writes that <q>almost all translators (including Vondel) and
commentators of the Mantuan bard think that the mistletoe is here
meant, probably for the simple reason that it was better known to
them than <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus europaeus</foreign>. I am convinced that Virgil can
only have thought of the latter. On the other side of the Alps the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> is much commoner than the mistletoe; on account of its
splendid red blossoms, sometimes twenty centimetres long, it is a
far larger and more conspicuous ornament of the trees; it bears
really golden yellow fruit (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Croceus fetus</foreign>), whereas the berries of the
mistletoe are almost white; and it attaches itself by preference
to the oak, whereas the mistletoe is very seldom found on the
oak.</q><note place='foot'>Prof. P. J. Veth, <q>De leer der
signatuur, III. De mistel en de
riembloem,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv
für Ethnographie</hi>, vii. (1894) p. 105.
The Dutch language has separate
names for the two species: mistletoe is
<foreign lang='nl' rend='italic'>mistel</foreign>, and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> is <foreign lang='nl' rend='italic'>riembloem</foreign>.</note> Again, Mr. W. R. Paton writes to me from Mount
Athos:<note place='foot'>His letter is dated 18th February,
1908.</note> <q>The oak is here called <foreign rend='italic'>dendron</foreign>, <emph>the</emph> tree. As for the
mistletoe there are two varieties, both called <foreign rend='italic'>axo</foreign> (ancient ἰξός).
Both are used to make bird-lime. The real <hi rend='italic'>Golden Bough</hi> is the
variety with yellow berries and no leaves. It is the parasite of the
oak and rarely grows on other trees. It is very abundant, and
now in winter the oak-trees which have adopted it seem from a
distance to be draped in a golden tissue. The other variety is our
own mistletoe and is strictly a parasite of the fir (a spruce fir, I don't
know its scientific name). It is also very abundant.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reason for
preferring
common
mistletoe. Perhaps
Virgil
confused
the two
species.</note>
Thus in favour of identifying Virgil's mistletoe (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>viscum</foreign>) with
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> rather than with common mistletoe it has been urged,
first, that the berries of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> are bright yellow, whereas those
of the mistletoe are of a greenish white; and, second, that the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> commonly grows on oaks, whereas mistletoe seldom does
so, indeed in Italy mistletoe is said never to be found on an oak.
Both these circumstances certainly speak strongly in favour of
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign>; since Virgil definitely describes the berries as of a
saffron-yellow (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>croceus</foreign>) and says that the plant grew on a holm-oak.
Yet on the other hand Virgil tells us that the plant put forth fresh
leaves in the depths of winter (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>brumali frigore</foreign>, strictly speaking,
<q>the cold of the winter solstice</q>); and this would best apply to
the common mistletoe, which is evergreen, whereas <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> is
deciduous.<note place='foot'>But Sir Francis Darwin writes to
me:&mdash;<q>I do not quite see why <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign>
should not put out leaves in
winter as easily as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum</foreign>, in both
cases it would be due to unfolding
leaf buds; the fact that <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum</foreign> has
adult leaves at the time, while <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign>
has not, does not really affect
the matter.</q> However, Mr. Paton
tells us, as we have just seen, that in
winter the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> growing on the
oaks of Mount Athos has no leaves,
though its yellow berries are very
conspicuous.</note> Accordingly, if we must decide between the two species,
this single circumstance appears to incline the balance in favour of
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
common mistletoe. But is it not possible that Virgil, whether consciously
or unconsciously, confused the two plants and combined
traits from both in his description? Both parasites are common
in Italy and in appearance they are much alike except for the
colour of the berries. As a loving observer of nature, Virgil was
probably familiar by sight with both, but he may not have examined
them closely; and he might be excused if he thought that the
parasite which he saw growing, with its clusters of bright yellow
berries, on oaks in winter, was identical with the similar parasite
which he saw growing, with its bunches of greenish white
berries and its pale green leaves, on many other trees of the
forest. The confusion would be all the more natural if the Celts
of northern Italy, in whose country the poet was born, resembled
the modern Celts of Brittany in attaching bunches of the common
mistletoe to their cottages and leaving them there till the revolving
months had tinged the pale berries, leaves, and twigs with a golden
yellow, thereby converting the branch of mistletoe into a true
Golden Bough.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Aachen, effigy burnt at, i. 120, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aargau, Swiss canton, of, Lenten fire-custom in, i. 119;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition as to oak-mistletoe in, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe called <q>thunder-besom</q> in, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees in, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abeghian, Manuk, on creeping through cleft trees in Armenia, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abensberg in Bavaria, burning the Easter Man at, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abeokuta, use of bull-roarers at, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aber, the Lake of, in Upper Austria, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aberdeenshire, custom at reaping the last corn in, i. 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 296;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holed rock used by childless women in, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aberfeldy, Hallowe'en fires near, i. 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aborigines of Victoria, their custom as to emu fat, i. 13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abougit, Father X., S.J., on the ceremony of the new fire at Jerusalem, i. 130</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abruzzi, new Easter fire in the, i. 122;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>water consecrated at Easter in the, 122 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer rites of fire and water in the, 209 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acacia, the heart in the flower of the, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acarnanian story of Prince Sunless, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achern, St. John's fires at, i. 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achterneed, in Ross-shire, Beltane cakes at, i. 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acireale, in Sicily, Midsummer fires at, i. 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adder stones, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Addison, Joseph, on witchcraft in Switzerland, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adonis and Aphrodite, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aelst, Peter van, painter, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aeneas and the Golden Bough, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africa, girls secluded at puberty in, i. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread and seclusion of women at menstruation in, 79 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees in, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers in, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, British Central, the Anyanja of, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, British East, i. 81;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of new fire in, 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Nandi of, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Akikuyu of, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, East, ceremony of the new fire in, i. 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Swahili of, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, German East, the Wajagga of, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Washamba of, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Bondeis of, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Wadoe of, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, German South-West, the Ovambo of, ii. <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, North, Midsummer fires in, i. 213 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, South, the Thonga of, ii. <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, West, theory of an external soul embodied in an animal prevalent in, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ritual of death and resurrection at initiation in, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>African stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Balders, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Afterbirth buried under a tree, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of child animated by a ghost and sympathetically connected with a banana-tree, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as brother or sister of child, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as a second child, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as a guardian spirit, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and navel-string regarded as guardian angels of the man, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agaric growing on birch-trees, superstitions as to, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aglu, New year fires at, i. 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Air thought to be poisoned at eclipses, i. 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aisne, Midsummer fires in the department of, i. 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aix, squibs at Midsummer in, i. 193;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer king at, i. 194, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>

<lg>
<l>Agni, Hindoo deity, i. 99 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fire-god, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ague, Midsummer bonfires deemed a cure for, i. 162;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaps across the Midsummer bonfires thought to be a preventive of, 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agweh, on the Slave Coast, custom of widows at, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ahlen, in Munsterland, i. 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ahriman, the devil of the Persians, i. 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aht or Nootka Indians of Vancouver Island, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ahura Mazda, the supreme being of the Persians, i. 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ain, Lenten fires in the department of, i. 114</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ainos of Japan, their mourning caps, i. 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their use of mugwort in exorcism, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their veneration for mistletoe, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>A-Kamba of British East Africa, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 23</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akikuyu of British East Africa, their dread of menstruous women, i. 81;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ritual of the new birth among the, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp, Roman version of, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alaska, seclusion of girls at puberty among the Indians of, i. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Esquimaux of, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alastir and the Bare-Stripping Hangman, Argyleshire story of, ii. <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albania, Midsummer fires in, i. 212;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albanian story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albert Nyanza, the Wakondyo of the, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albino head of secret society on the Lower Congo, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alders free from mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alfoors or Toradjas of Celebes, their custom at the smelting of iron, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their doctrine of the plurality of souls, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Algeria, Midsummer fires in, i. 213</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alice Springs in Central Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allan, John Hay, on the Hays of Errol, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allandur temple, at St. Thomas's Mount, Madras, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All-healer, name applied to mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All Saints' Day, omens on, i. 240;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the first of November, 225;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bonfires on, 246;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sheep passed through a hoop on, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All Souls, Feast of, i. 223 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 225 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Almond-trees, mistletoe on, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>A-Louyi, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 28 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alsace, Midsummer fires in, i. 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cats burnt in Easter bonfires in, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Althenneberg, in Bavaria, Easter fires at, i. 143 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Altmark, Easter bonfires in, i. 140, 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alum burnt at Midsummer, i. 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alungu, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alur, a tribe of the Upper Nile, i. 64</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alvarado, Pedro de, Spanish general, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Amadhlozi</foreign>, ancestral spirits in serpent form, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amambwe, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Amatongo</foreign>, plural of <foreign rend='italic'>itongo</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amazon, ordeals of young men among the Indians of the, i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambamba, in West Africa, death, resurrection, and the new birth in, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amboyna, hair of criminals cut in, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambras, Midsummer customs at, i. 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>America, Central, the Mosquito territory in, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>America, North, Indians of, not allowed to sit on bare ground in war, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls at puberty among the Indians of, 41 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread and seclusion of menstruous women among the Indians of, 87 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stories of the external soul among the Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>religious associations among the Indian tribes of, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, South, seclusion of girls at puberty among the Indians of, i. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigies of Judas burnt at Easter in, 128;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 212 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammerland, in Oldenburg, cart-wheel used as charm against witchcraft in, i. 345 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amphitryo besieges Taphos, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amulets, rings and bracelets as, i. 92;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as soul-boxes, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>degenerate into ornaments, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestor, wooden image of, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestors, worship of, in Fiji, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestral spirits incarnate in serpents, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anderson, Miss, of Barskimming, i. 171 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andes, the Peruvian, effigies of Judas burnt at Easter in the, i. 128</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andjra, a district of Morocco, i. 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in the, 213 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer rites of water in, 216;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>animals bathed at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>

<lg>
<l>Andreas, parish of, in the Isle of Man, i. 224, 305, 307 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angass, the, of Northern Nigeria, their belief in external human souls lodged in animals, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angel, need-fire revealed by an, i. 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -man, effigy of, burnt at Midsummer, i. 167</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angelus bell, the, i. 110, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angoniland, British Central Africa, customs as to girls at puberty in, i. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs as to salt in, 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angus, superstitious remedy for the <q>quarter-ill</q> in, i. 296 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anhalt, Easter bonfires in, i. 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Animal, bewitched, or part of it, burnt to compel the witch to appear, i. 303, 305, 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sickness transferred to, ii. <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and man, sympathetic relation between, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Animal familiars of wizards and witches, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Animals burnt alive as a sacrifice in England, Wales, and Scotland, i. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches transformed into, 315 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bewitched, buried alive, i. 324 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>live, burnt at Spring and Midsummer festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the animals perhaps deemed embodiments of witches, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the language of, learned by means of fern-seed, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul in, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical transformation of men into animals, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>helpful, in fairy tales. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Helpful'>Helpful</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ankenmilch bohren</foreign>, to make the need-fire, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ankole, in Central Africa, i. 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annam, dread of menstruous women in, i. 85;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of wormwood to avert demons in, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anpu and Bata, ancient Egyptian story of, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Anthemis nobilis</foreign>, camomile, gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ant-hill, insane people buried in an, i. 64</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ants employed to sting girls at puberty, i. 61;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to sting young men, i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antonius Mountain, in Thuringia, Christmas bonfire on the, i. 265 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antwerp, wicker giants at, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anula tribe of Northern Australia, their rites of initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anyanja of British Central Africa, their dread of menstruous women, i. 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apaches, i. 21;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers among the, ii, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apala cured by Indra in the Rigveda, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ape, a Batta totem, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aphrodite and Adonis, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollo, identified with the Celtic Grannus, i. 112</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Soranus, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollo's temple at Cumae, i. 99</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apple, divination by the sliced, i. 238;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and candle, biting at, 241, 242, 243, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apple-tree as life-index of boy, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees, torches thrown at, i. 108;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe on, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apples, dipping for, at Hallowe'en, i. 237, 239, 241, 242, 243, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apricot-trees, mistletoe on, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>April, the twenty-seventh of, in popular superstitions of Morocco, i. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of the new fire in, 136 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Chinese festival of fire in, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arab women in Morocco, their superstitions as to plants at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabia, tree-spirits in snake form in, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabian, modern, story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Arabian Nights</hi>, story of the external soul in the, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabs of Morocco, their Midsummer customs, i. 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aran, in the valley of the Garonne, Midsummer fires at, i. 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arch, child after an illness passed under an, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>young men at initiation passed under a leafy, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>triumphal, suggested origin of the, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archer (<foreign rend='italic'>Tirant</foreign>), effigy of, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arches, novices at initiation passed under arches in Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archways, passing under, as a means of escaping evil spirits or sickness, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ardennes, the Belgian, bonfires on the first Sunday of Lent in the, i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the French, Lenten fires and customs in the, 109 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in the, 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in the, 253;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cats burnt alive in Lenten bonfires, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argo, tree of which the ship was made, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argyleshire stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argyrus, temple of Hercules at, i. 99 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aricia, the priest of, and the Golden Bough, i. 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the priest of Diana at, perhaps a personified Jupiter, ii. <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Arician'/>
<l>Arician grove, the Midsummer festival of fire in the, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the priest of the, a personification of an oak-spirit, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ariminum, triumphal arch of Augustus at, ii. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arizona and New Mexico, use of bull-roarers in, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>

<lg>
<l>Arks, sacred, of the Cherokees, i. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armenia, were-wolves in, i. 316;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sick people creep through cleft trees in, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armenian church, bonfires at Candlemas in the, i. 131</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; idea of the sun as a wheel, i. 334 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arms of youths punctured to make them good hunters, i. 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnstadt, witches burnt at, i. 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arran, the need-fire in, i. 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arrows used as a love-charm, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artemis Perasia, at Castabala in Cappadocia, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Artemisia absinthium</foreign>, wormwood, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vulgaris</foreign>, mugwort, gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artois, mugwort at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arunta of Central Australia, their sacred pole, i. 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their dread of women at menstruation, 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legend that the ancestors kept their spirits in their <foreign rend='italic'>churinga</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of initiation among the, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>initiation of medicine-men among the, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryan god of the thunder and the oak, i. 265</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; peoples, stories of the external soul among, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryans of Europe, importance of the Midsummer festival among the, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the oak the chief sacred tree of the, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ascension Day, parasitic rowan should be cut on, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asceticism not primitive, i. 65</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ash Wednesday, effigy burnt on, i. 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ash-trees, children passed through cleft ash-trees as a cure for rupture or rickets, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ashes'/>
<l>Ashes in divination, i. 243, 244, 245.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Sticks-Charred'>Sticks, Charred</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of bonfires put in fowls' nests, i. 112, 338;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>increase fertility of fields, 141, 337;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>make cattle thrive, 141, 338;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>placed in a person's shoes, 156;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>administered to cattle to make them fat, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of dead, disposal of the, i. 11</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Easter bonfire mixed with seed at sowing, i. 121</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Hallowe'en fires scattered, i. 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of holy fires a protection against demons, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Midsummer fires strewed on fields to fertilize them, i. 170, 190, 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against conflagration, 174, 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against lightning, 187, 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against thunder, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>put by people in their shoes, 191 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a cure for consumption, 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rubbed by people on their hair or bodies, 213, 214, 215;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>good for the eyes, 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashes of the need-fire strewn on fields to protect the crops against vermin, i. 274;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used as a medicine, 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of New Year's fire used to rub sore eyes, i. 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Yule log strewed on fields, i. 250;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to heal swollen glands, 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ashur</foreign>, Arab New Year's Day, i. 217, 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asia Minor, the Celts in, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure for possession by an evil spirit in, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creeping through rifted rocks in, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aspen, mistletoe on, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Aspidium filix mas</foreign>, the male fern, superstitions as to, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ass, child passed under an, as a cure for whooping-cough, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assam, the Khasis of, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Lushais of, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assiga, tribe of South Nigeria, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Associations, religious, among the Indian tribes of North America, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyrian ritual, use of golden axe in, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aston, W. G., quoted, i. 137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the fire-walk in Japan, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Astral spirit of a witch, i. 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Atai</foreign>, external soul in the Mota language, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ath, in Hainaut, procession of giants at, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athboy, in County Meath, i. 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athena, priestess of, uses a white umbrella, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athenians offer cakes to Cronus, i. 153 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athens, ceremony of the new fire at Easter in, i. 130</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athis, in Normandy, Christmas bonfires at, i. 266</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athos, Mount, mistletoe at, ii. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atrae, city in Mesopotamia, i. 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aubrey, John, on the Midsummer fires, i. 197</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aufkirchen in Bavaria, burning the Easter Man at, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>August, procession of wicker giants in, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, first of, Festival of the Cross on the, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the eighteenth, feast of Florus and Laurus, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the sixth, festival of St. Estapin, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustus, triumphal arch of Augustus at Ariminum, ii. <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>

<lg>
<l>Aunis, wonderful herbs gathered on St. John's Eve in, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's wort in, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vervain gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>four-leaved clover at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Saintonge, Midsummer fires in, i. 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aurora, in the New Hebrides, <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign> in, ii. <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australia, dread and seclusion of women at menstruation in, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passing under an arch as a rite of initiation in, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>initiation of young men in, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers in, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Central, pointing sticks or bones in, i. 14 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its desert nature, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, South-Eastern, sex totems among the natives of, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australian languages, words for fire and wood in, ii. <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Austria, Midsummer fires in, i. 172 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log among the Servians of, 262 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in Upper, 279;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe used to prevent nightmare in, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Autumn fires, i. 220 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Auvergne, Lenten fires in, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story of a were-wolf in, 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ave Maria</foreign> bell, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avernus, Lake, and the Golden Bough, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Awa-nkonde, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 28</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Awasungu, the house of the,</q> i. 28</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Awka in South Nigeria, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Azemmur, in Morocco, Midsummer fires at, i. 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Azores, bonfires and divination on Midsummer Eve in the, i. 208 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed at Midsummer in the, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aztecs, their punishment of witches and wizards, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baal and Beltane, i. 149 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 150 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babine Lake in British Columbia, i. 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Backache at reaping, leaps over the Midsummer bonfire thought to be a preventive of, i. 165, 168, 189, 344 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>set down to witchcraft, 343 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 345;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at harvest, mugwort a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creeping through a holed stone to prevent backache at harvest, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Badache</foreign>, double-axe, Midsummer King of the, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Badagas of the Neilgherry Hills, their fire-walk, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baden, Lenten fire-custom in, i. 117;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter bonfires in, 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 167 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Badham Court oak, in Gloucestershire, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Badnyak</foreign>, Yule log, i. 259, 263</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Badnyi Dan</foreign>, Christmas Eve, i. 258, 263</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bag, souls of persons deposited in a, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Baganda'/>
<l>Baganda, children live apart from their parents among the, i. 23 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls at puberty among the, 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition as to women who do not menstruate, 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abstain from salt in certain cases, 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their dread of menstruous women, 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their beliefs and customs concerning the afterbirth, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Uganda'>Uganda</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahaus or Kayans of Central Borneo, i. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahima of Central Africa, their dread of menstruous women, i. 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahr-el-Ghazal province, ceremony of the new fire in the, i. 134 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bakairi, the, of Brazil, call bull-roarers <q>thunder and lightning,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baking-forks, witches ride on, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bakuba or Bushongo of the Congo, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balder, his body burnt, i. 102;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped in Norway, 104;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>camomile sacred to, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer sacred to, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a tree-spirit or deity of vegetation, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interpreted as a mistletoe-bearing oak, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his invulnerability, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>why Balder was thought to shine, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and the mistletoe, i. 101 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his life or death in the mistletoe, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps a real man deified, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the myth of, i. 101 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reproduced in the Midsummer festival of Scandinavia, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps dramatized in ritual, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indian parallel to, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>African parallels to, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balder's Balefires, name formerly given to Midsummer bonfires in Sweden, i. 172, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Grove, i. 104, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Balders-brâ</foreign>, Balder's eyelashes, a name for camomile, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bâle, Lenten fire-custom in the canton of, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balefires, Balder's, at Midsummer in Sweden, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bali, filing of teeth in, i. 68 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees in, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balkan Peninsula, need-fire in the, i. 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ball, game of, played to determine the King of Summer, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ballyvadlea, in Tipperary, woman burnt as a witch at, i. 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>

<lg>
<l>Balnagown loch, in Lismore, i. 316</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balong of the Cameroons, their external souls in animals, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balquhidder, hill of the fires at, i. 149;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hallowe'en bonfires at, 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Balum</foreign>, New Guinea word signifying bull-roarer, ghost, and mythical monster, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banana-tree, afterbirth of child buried under a, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bancroft, H. H., on the external souls of the Zapotecs, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banivas of the Orinoco, their scourging of girls at puberty, i. 66 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Baraka</foreign>, blessed or magical virtue, i. 216, 218, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barclay, Sheriff, on Hallowe'en fires, i. 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bardney bumpkin, on witch as hare, i. 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bare-Stripping Hangman, Argyleshire story of the, ii. <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barker, W. G. M. Jones, on need-fire in Yorkshire, i. 286 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barley plant, external soul of prince in a, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ba-Ronga, the, of South Africa, their story of a clan whose external souls were in a cat, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Barotse'/>
<l>Barotse or Marotse of the Zambesi, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 28, 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barren cattle driven through fire, i. 203, 338</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; women hope to conceive through fertilizing influence of vegetables, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barricading the road against a ghostly pursuer, ii. <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barsana, in North India, Holi bonfires at, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bartle Bay, in British New Guinea, festival of the wild mango tree at, i. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basque hunter transformed into bear, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bastar, province of India, treatment of witches in, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bastian, Adolph, on rites of initiation in West Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basutos, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bata and Anpu, ancient Egyptian story of, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bathing in the sea at Easter, i. 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Midsummer, 208, 210, 216, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be dangerous on Midsummer Day, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bats, the lives of men in, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called men's <q>brothers,</q> <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Battas, their doctrine of the plurality of souls, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their totemic system, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Battel, Andrew, on the colour of negro children at birth, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bavaria, Easter bonfires in, i. 143 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief as to eclipses in, 162;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 164 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaf-clad mummer at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod in, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creeping through a holed stone or narrow opening in, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Upper, use of mistletoe in, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bavarian peasants, their belief as to hazel, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bavili, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beal-fires on Midsummer Eve in Yorkshire, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bean, King of the, i. 153 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beans, divination by, i. 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bear, external soul of warrior in a, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Basque hunter transformed into, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>simulated transformation of novice into a, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; clan, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -dance of man who pretends to be a bear, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bear's skin, Lapp women shoot blindfold at a, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bearers to carry royal personages, i. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beating girls at puberty, i. 61, 66 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a form of purification, 61, 64 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beauce, festival of torches in, i. 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story of a were-wolf in, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Perche, Midsummer fires in, i. 188</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beaver clan, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bechuana belief as to sympathetic relation of man to wounded crocodile, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bee, external soul of an ogre in a, ii. <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beech or fir used to make the Yule log, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tree burnt in Lenten bonfire, i. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beeches, struck by lightning, proportion of, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>free from mistletoe, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bees thought to be killed by menstruous women, i. 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ashes of bonfires used to cure ailments of, 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beetle, external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Begetting novices anew at initiation, pretence of, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Behar, the fire-walk in, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Beifuss</foreign>, German name for mugwort, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bel, the fires of, i. 147, 157, 158 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beleth, John, his <hi rend='italic'>Rationale Divinorum Officiorum</hi> quoted, i. 161 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>

<lg>
<l>Belford, in Northumberland, the Yule log at, i. 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belgium, Lenten fires in, i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing on Midsummer Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by flowers on Midsummer Eve in, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mugwort gathered on St. John's Day or Eve in, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vervain gathered on St. John's Day in, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>four-leaved clover at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the witches' Sabbath in, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bella-Coola'/>
<l>Bella Coola Indians of British Columbia, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of mourners among the, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belli-Paaro society in West Africa, rites of initiation in the, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellochroy, i. 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bells worn by priest in exorcism, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on his legs, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, church, silenced in Holy Week, i. 123, 125 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rung on Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rung to drive away witches, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beltane, popularly derived from Baal, i. 149 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 150 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the need-fire at, 293;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yellow Day of, 293;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sheep passed through a hoop at, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Hallowe'en the two chief fire-festivals of the British Celts, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cakes, i. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 150, 152, 153, 154, 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; carline, i. 148, 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve (the Eve of May Day), a witching time, i. 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fire, pretence of throwing a man into the, i. 148, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled by the friction of oak-wood, i. 148, 155, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fires, i. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Wales, 155 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Ireland, 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Nottinghamshire, 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benametapa, the king of, in East Africa, i. 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bengal, seclusion of girls at puberty in, i. 68;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Oraons of, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bengalee stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beni Ahsen, a tribe in Morocco, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their Midsummer fires, i. 215 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mgild, a Berber tribe of Morocco, their Midsummer fires, i. 215</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Snous, the, of Morocco, their Midsummer rites, i. 216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bent, J. Theodore, on passing sick children through a cleft oak, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berber belief as to water at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tale, milk-tie in a, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berbers of North Africa, their Midsummer customs, i. 213 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 219</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bergen, Midsummer bonfires at, i. 171</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bering Strait, the Esquimaux of, i. 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berleburg, in Westphalia, the Yule log at, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berlin, the divining-rod at, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bern, Midsummer fires in the canton of, i. 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in the canton of, 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches put to death in the canton of, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berry, Lenten fire custom in, i. 115;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 189;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 251 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>four-leaved clover at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Besoms, blazing, flung aloft to make the corn grow high, i. 340;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to drive away witches, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bethlehem, new Easter fire carried to, i. 130 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Between the two Beltane fires,</q> i. 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beul, fire of, need-fire, i. 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bevan, Professor A. A., i. 83 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beverley, on the initiatory rites of the Virginian Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bewitched animals burnt alive, i. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried alive, 324 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cow, mugwort applied to, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; things burnt to compel the witch to appear, i. 322</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhils of India, torture of witches among the, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhuiyars of Mirzapur, their dread of menstrual pollution, i. 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhuiyas, a Dravidian tribe, fire-walk among the, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Bhut</foreign>, demon, ii. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bidasari and the golden fish, Malay story of, ii. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bilqula. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Bella-Coola'>Bella Coola</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Binbinga tribe of Northern Australia, their rites of initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>initiation of medicine-man in the, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Binding up a cleft stick or tree a mode of barricading the road against a ghostly pursuer, ii. <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bir, a tribal hero, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birch used to kindle need-fire, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and plane, fire made by the friction of, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, branches of, on Midsummer Day, i. 177, 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against witchcraft, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; trees set up at Midsummer, i. 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to keep off witches, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe on, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bird, disease transferred to, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brings first fire to earth, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bird-lime made from mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birds, external souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carry seed of mistletoe, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birseck, Lenten fires at, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birth, the new, of novices at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>

<lg>
<l>Birth-names of Central American Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees in Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Europe, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birthday of the Sun at the winter solstice, i. 246</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bisection of the year, Celtic, i. 223</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Black Corrie of Ben Breck, the giant of, in an Argyleshire tale, ii. <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Forest, Midsummer fires in the, i. 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Isle, Ross-shire, i. 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; poplars, mistletoe on, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; spauld, a disease of cattle, cure for, i. 325</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; three-legged horse ridden by witches, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackening girls at puberty, i. 41, 60</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blemishes, physical, transferred to witches, i. 160 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blindness of Hother, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Block, the Yule, i. 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blocksberg, the resort of witches, i. 171;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Mount of the Witches, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Blood'/>
<l>Blood, girls at puberty forbidden to see, i. 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disastrous effect of seeing menstruous, 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>drawn from women who do not menstruate, 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -brotherhood between men and animals among the Fans, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -covenant between men and animals, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, human, used in rain-making ceremonies, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, menstruous, dread of, i. 76;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deemed fatal to cattle, 80;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>miraculous virtue attributed to, 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>medicinal application of, 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of St. John found on St. John's wort and other plants at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of sheep poured on image of god as a sin-offering, i. 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boa-constrictors, kings at death turn into, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boas, Dr. Franz, on seclusion of Shuswap girls at puberty, i. 53;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on customs observed by mourners among the Bella Coola Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on initiation into the wolf society of the Nootka Indians, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the relation between clans and secret societies, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boar's skin, shoes of, worn by a king at inauguration, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boars, familiar spirits of wizards in, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lives of persons bound up with those of, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external human souls in, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bocage of Normandy, Midsummer fires in the, i. 185;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in the, 252;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torchlight processions on Christmas Eve in the, 266</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Body-without-soul in a Ligurian story, ii. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a German story, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a Breton story, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a Basque story, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boeotian festival of the Great Daedala, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bogota, rigorous training of the heir to the throne of, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bohemia, water and fire consecrated at Easter in, i. 123 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bonfires on May Day in, 159;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 173 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 278 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charm to make corn grow high in, 340;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offering to water-spirits on Midsummer Eve in, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>simples gathered on St. John's Night in, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by means of flowers on Midsummer Eve in, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mugwort at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>elder-flowers gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wild thyme gathered on Midsummer Day in, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>thunder besoms</q> in, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed on St. John's Day in, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bohemian poachers, their use of vervain, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their use of seeds of fir-cones, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bohus, Midsummer fires in, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Boidès</foreign>, bonfires, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boiling bewitched animal or part of it to compel witch to appear, i. 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 323</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; milk, omens drawn from, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; resin, ordeal of, i. 311</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boils, crawling under a bramble as a cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolivia, the Chiriguanos of, i. 56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yuracares of, 57 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires on St. John's Eve in, 213;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>La Paz in, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boloki of the Upper Congo, birth-plants among the, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers among the, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bondeis of German East Africa, rites of initiation among the, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bone used to point with in sorcery, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incident of, in folk-tales, 73 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of bird (eagle or swan), women at menstruation obliged to drink out of, 45, 48, 49, 50, 73 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 90, 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bones burnt in the Easter bonfires, i. 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in Midsummer fires, 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of dead husbands carried by their widows, i. 91 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonfire Day in County Leitrim, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bonfires'/>
<l>Bonfires supposed to protect against conflagrations, i. 107, 108;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protect
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
houses against lightning and conflagration, 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lit by the persons last married, 107, 109;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against witchcraft, 108, 109, 154;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against sickness, 108, 109;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against sorcery, 156;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quickening and fertilizing influence of, 336 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omens of marriage drawn from, 338 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protect fields against hail, 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at festivals in India, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Fires'>Fires</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonfires, Midsummer, intended to drive away dragons, i. 161;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protect cattle against witchcraft, 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to ensure good crops, 188, 336</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boniface, Archbishop of Mainz, i. 270</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonnach stone in a Celtic story, ii. <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Bordes</foreign>, bonfires, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borlase, William, on Midsummer fires in Cornwall, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borneo, festivals in, i. 13;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls at puberty in, 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>trees and plants as life-indices in, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creeping through a cleft stick after a funeral in, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>giving the slip to an evil spirit in, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Dyaks of, i. 5, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Kayans of, i. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bororo of Brazil, their use of bull-roarers, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borrow, witches come to, i. 322, 323, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bosnia, need-fire in, i. 286;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life-trees of children in, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bossuet, Bishop, on the Midsummer bonfires, i. 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bottesford, in Lincolnshire, mistletoe deemed a remedy for epilepsy at, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bottle, external soul of queen in a, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bougainville, use of bull-roarers in, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bough, the Golden, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the priest of Aricia, i. 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a branch of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Golden-Bough'>Golden Bough</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boulia district of Queensland, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bourbonnais, mistletoe a remedy for epilepsy in, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Bourdifailles</foreign>, bonfires, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bourke, Captain J. G., on the bull-roarer, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bowels, novice at initiation supplied by spirits with a new set of, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bowes, in Yorkshire, need-fire at, i. 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Box, external soul of king in a, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul of cannibal in a, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boxes or arks, sacred, i. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Box-tree, external soul of giant in a, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boxwood blessed on Palm Sunday, i. 184, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boy and girl produce need-fire by friction of wood, i. 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boys at initiation thought to be swallowed by wizards, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brabant, Midsummer fires in, i. 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. Peter's bonfires in, 195;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wicker giants in, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bracelets as amulets, i. 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Braemar Highlanders, their Hallowe'en fires, i. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahman, the Hindoo creator, i. 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahman called <q>twice born,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; boys forbidden to see the sun, i. 68 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; student, his observances at end of his studentship, i. 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahmanic ritual at inauguration of a king, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bramble, crawling under a, as a cure for whooping-cough, etc., ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brand, John, on the Yule log, i. 247, 255</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brandenburg, simples culled at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Brandons</foreign>, the Sunday of the, i. 110;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torches carried about fields and streets, 111 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brands of Midsummer fires a protection against lightning, conflagration, and spells, i. 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against thunder, 191;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lighted, carried round cattle, 341</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Braunrode in the Harz Mountains, Easter fires at, i. 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brazier, walking through a lighted, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brazil, the Guaranis of, i. 56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls at puberty among the Indians of, 56, 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Uaupes of, 61;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordeals undergone by young men among the Indians of, 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigies of Judas burnt at Easter in, 128;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires of St. John in, 213;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Caripunas of, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Bororo of, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Nahuqua of, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Bakairi of, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bread, reverence for, i. 13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breadalbane, i. 149;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treatment of mad cow in, 326</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breadfruit-tree planted over navel-string of child, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Breath, scoring above the,</q> cutting a witch on the forehead, i. 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breitenbrunn, the <q>Charcoal Man</q> at, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brekinjska, in Slavonia, need-fire at, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bresse, Midsummer bonfires in, i. 189</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brest, Midsummer fire-custom at, i. 184</l>
</lg>

<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>

<lg>
<l>Breteuil, canton of, Midsummer fires in the, i. 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breton belief that women can be impregnated by the moon, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brezina, in Slavonia, need-fire at, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Briar-thorn, divination by, i. 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bri-bri Indians of Costa Rica, seclusion of women at menstruation among the, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bride not allowed to tread the earth, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>last married, made to leap over bonfire, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and bridegroom, mock, at bonfires, i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bride, parish of, in the Isle of Man, i. 306, 307 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bridegroom not to touch the ground with his feet, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brie, Isle de France, effigy of giant burnt on Midsummer Eve at, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brihaspati, Hindoo deity, i. 99 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Briony, wreaths of, at Midsummer, i. 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brisbane River in Queensland, use of bull-roarers on the, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>British Columbia, seclusion of girls at puberty among the Indians of, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread and seclusion of menstruous women among the Indians of, 89 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Kwakiutl of, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Koskimo Indians of, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of initiation among the Indians of, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Thompson Indians of, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Shuswap Indians of, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brittany, Midsummer fires in, i. 183 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stones thrown into the Midsummer fires in, 240;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 253;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe hung over doors of stables and byres in, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed used by treasure-seekers in, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Brochs</foreign>, prehistoric ruins, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brocken, in the Harz mountains, associated with witches, i. 160 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 171 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Broom, a protective against witchcraft, i. 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Brother</q> and <q>sister,</q> titles given by men and women to their sex totems, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brotherhood of the Green Wolf at Jumièges in Normandy, i. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brothers, ancient Egyptian story of the Two, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, Dr. George, quoted, i. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on external soul in Melanesia, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brughe, John, his cure for bewitched cattle, i. 324 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brund (or brand), the Christmas, the Yule log, i. 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brunswick, belief as to menstruous women in, i. 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter bonfires in, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buchan, Hallowe'en fires in, i. 232 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Bûche de Noël</foreign>, the Yule log, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddha and the crocodile, Indian story, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buffalo, external souls of a clan in a, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Batta totem, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; clan in Uganda, i. 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buffaloes, external human souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bühl, St. John's fires at, i. 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bukaua, the, of New Guinea, girls at puberty secluded among the, i. 35;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their rites of initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Bu-ku-rú</foreign>, ceremonial uncleanness, i. 65 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buléon, Mgr., quoted by Father H. Trilles, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulgaria, the Yule log in, i. 264 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 281, 285;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>simples and flowers culled on St. John's Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creeping through an arch of vines as a cure in, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creeping under the root of a willow as a cure for whooping-cough in, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Simeon, prince of, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bullet blessed by St. Hubert used to shoot witches with, i. 315 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bullock, bewitched, burnt to cause the witch to appear, i. 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bull-roarers swung, i. 133;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sounded at initiation of lads, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used as magical instruments to make rain, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sounded at festivals of the dead, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made from trees struck by lightning, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sounded to make the wind blow, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called <q>thunder and lightning,</q> <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sounded to promote the growth of the crops, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>originally magical instruments for making thunder, wind, and rain, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be seen by women, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called by name which means a ghost or spirit of the dead, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called by the same name as the monster who swallows lads at initiation, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept in men's club-house, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>named after dead men, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, sound of, thought to resemble thunder, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to increase the food supply, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to be the voice of a spirit, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burchard, Bishop of Worms, his condemnation of a heathen practice, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Bures</foreign>, bonfires, i. 110 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 111 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burford, in Oxfordshire, Midsummer giant and dragon at, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burghead, the burning of the Clavie at, i. 266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the old rampart at, 267 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>

<lg>
<l>Burgundy, Firebrand Sunday in, i. 114;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 254</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burma, the Karens of, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burne, Miss F. C., and Jackson, Miss G. F., on the fear of witchcraft in Shropshire, i. 342 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Burning-The-Witches'/>
<l>Burning the witches on May Day, i. 157, 159, 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of effigies in the Midsummer fires, 195;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the witches in the Hallowe'en fires, 232 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Clavie at Burghead, 266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of a bewitched animal or part of it to cause the witch to appear, 303, 305, 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of human beings in the fires, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of live animals at spring and Midsummer festivals, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the animals perhaps deemed embodiments of witches, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of human victims annually, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; discs thrown into the air, i. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 119, 143, 165, 166, 168 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the Easter Man, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; the Old Wife (Old Woman),</q> i. 116, 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; the Witches,</q> i. 116, 118 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 154;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a popular name for the fires of the festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; wheels rolled down hill, i. 116, 117 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 119, 141, 143, 161, 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 166, 173, 174, 201, 328, 334, 337 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rolled over fields at Midsummer to fertilize them, 191, 340 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps intended to burn witches, 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burns, Robert, i. 207;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Hallowe'en, 234</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burnt sacrifices to stay cattle-plague in England, Wales, and Scotland, i. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burs, a preservative against witchcraft, i. 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burying bewitched animals alive, i. 324 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; girls at puberty in the ground, i. 38 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bushmen, their dread of menstruous women, i. 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their way of warming up the star Sirius, 332 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bushongo, royal persons among the, not allowed to set foot on the ground, i. 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of initiation among the, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butter thought to be improved by the Midsummer fires, i. 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bewitched, burnt at a cross-road, 322</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; -churning,</q> Swiss expression for kindling a need-fire, i. 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byron, Lord, and the oak, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cabbages, divination by, at Hallowe'en, i. 242.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Kail'>Kail</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caesar on the fortification walls of the Gauls, i. 267;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on human sacrifices among the Celts of Gaul, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caesarea. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Everek</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caffre villages, women's tracks at, i. 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caffres of South Africa, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cages, girls at puberty confined in, i. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 44, 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Cailleach beal-tine</foreign>, the Beltane carline, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cairnshee, in Kincardineshire, Midsummer fires on, i. 206</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caithness, need-fire in, i. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cake, St. Michael's, i. 149, 154 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>salt, divination by, 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule or Christmas, 257, 259, 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cakes, Hallowe'en, i. 238, 241, 245;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Beltane, 148 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 150, 152, 153, 154, 155;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by, 242, 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calabar, soul of chief in sacred grove at, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>negroes of, their belief in external or bush souls lodged in animals, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fattening-house for girls in, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calabria, holy water at Easter in, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calamities, almost all, set down to witchcraft, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calendar, change in the Chinese, i. 137;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mohammedan, 216 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Julian, used by Mohammedans, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the reform of, in relation to floral superstitions, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calendars, conflict of, i. 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Calendeau</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>calignau</foreign>, the Yule-log, i. 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calf burnt alive to stop a murrain, i. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>California, seclusion of girls at puberty among the Indians of, i. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordeals among the Indians of, 64;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Senal Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Maidu Indians of, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Callander, the parish of, Beltane fires in, i. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hallowe'en fires in, 231</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calves burnt to stop disease in the herds, i. 301, 306</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calymnos, a Greek island, superstition as to menstruous women in, i. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambodia, seclusion of girls at puberty in, i. 70;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ritual at cutting a parasitic orchid in, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambodian or Siamese story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambridgeshire, witch as cat in, i. 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambus o' May, near Ballater, holed stone at, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cameroons, life of person bound up with tree in the, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theory of the external soul in, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>

<lg>
<l>Camomile (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Anthemis nobilis</foreign>) burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 213;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred to Balder, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campbell, Rev. J. G., on <foreign rend='italic'>deiseal</foreign>, i. 151 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campbell, Rev. John, on Coranna customs, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campo di Giove, in the Abruzzi, Easter candles at, i. 122</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candle, the Easter or Paschal, i. 121, 122, 125;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by the flame of a, 229;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule or Christmas, 255, 256, 260;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and apple, biting at, i. 241, 242, 243, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candlemas in the Armenian church, bonfires at, i. 131;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log at, 256 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; candles, i. 264 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candles used to keep off witches, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canopus and Sirius in Bushman lore, i. 333</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capart, Jean, on palettes found in Egyptian tombs, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cape York Peninsula in Queensland, i. 37, 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caper-spurge (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Euphorbia lathyris</foreign>) identified with mythical springwort, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capital of column, external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capitol at Rome, the oak of Jupiter on the, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cappadocia, the fire-walk at Castabala in, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capri, feast of the Nativity of the Virgin in, i. 220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capricorn, time when the sun enters the tropic of, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caps worn in mourning, i. 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cardiganshire, Hallowe'en in, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caribs, their theory of the plurality of souls, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carinthia, new fire at Easter in, i. 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caripunas Indians of Brazil, use of bull-roarers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carmichael, Alexander, on need-fire, i. 293 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on snake stones, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carn Brea, in Cornwall, Midsummer fires on, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnarvonshire, the cutty black sow in, i. 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnival, effigy burnt at end of, i. 120;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wicker giants at the, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnmoor, in Mull, need-fire kindled on, i. 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnwarth, in Cornwall, Midsummer fires at, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caroline Islands, traditionary origin of fire in the, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpathian Mountains, Midsummer fires on the, i. 175;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in the, 281;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Huzuls of the, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carrier Indians of North-Western America, funeral custom of the, i. 11;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their dread and seclusion of menstruous women, 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their honorific totems, ii. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carver, Captain Jonathan, his description of the rite of death and resurrection, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Casablanca, Midsummer fires at, i. 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cashmeer stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caspar, Balthasar, and Melchior, the Three Holy Kings, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassel, in France, wicker giants on Shrove Tuesday at, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassowaries, men disguised as, in Duk-duk ceremonies, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castabala, in Cappadocia, the fire-walk at, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castiglione a Casauria, Midsummer customs at, i. 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castle Ditches, in the Vale of Glamorgan, bonfires at, i. 156</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castres, in Southern France, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cat, a representative of the devil, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story of a clan whose souls were all in one, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Batta totem, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Cats'>Cats</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caterpillars, bonfires as a protection against, i. 114</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholic Church, its consecration of the Midsummer festival to St. John the Baptist, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cato on a Roman cure for dislocation, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cats'/>
<l>Cats burnt in bonfires, i. 109, ii. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps burnt as witches, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches changed into, i. 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 317, 318, 319 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cattle sacrificed at holy oak, i. 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protected against sorcery by sprigs of mullein, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fire carried round, 201, 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven out to pasture in spring and back in autumn, 223;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acquire the gift of speech on Christmas Eve, 254;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven through the need-fire, 270 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed by fairy darts, 303;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lighted brands carried round, 341;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to benefit by festivals of fire, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fumigated with smoke of Midsummer herbs, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and sheep driven through, round, or between bonfires, i. 108, 109, 141, 154, 157, 158, 159, 165, 175, 176, 179, 185, 188, 192, 202, 203, 204, 301, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cattle-Disease'/>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; disease, the Midsummer fires a protection against, i. 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributed to witchcraft, 302 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 343</l>
</lg>

<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -plague, need-fire kindled as a remedy for, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of an animal to stay a, 300 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -rearing tribes of South Africa, their dread of menstruous women, i. 79 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cave, initiation of medicine-men by spirits in a, ii. <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Cruachan, the <q>Hell-gate of Ireland,</q> i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cedar-bark, red, used in ceremonies of a secret society, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celebes, Macassar in, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of persons removed for safety from their bodies in, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Central, the Toradjas of, i. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Southern, birth-trees in, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celibacy of the Vestal Virgins, i. 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celtic bisection of the year, i. 223</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; population, their superstition as to Snake Stones, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celts, their two great fire-festivals on the Eve of May Day and Hallowe'en, i. 222, 224;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the oak worshipped by the, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the British, their chief fire-festivals, Beltane and Hallowe'en, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Brittany, their use of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Gaul, their human sacrifices, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the victims perhaps witches and wizards, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>W. Mannhardt's theory, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Ireland, their new fire on Hallowe'en, i. 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of northern Italy, ii. <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celts (prehistoric implements) called <q>thunderbolts,</q> i. 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Central Provinces of India, cure for fever in the, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceos, Greek island of, sick children passed through a cleft oak in, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceram, seclusion of girls at puberty in, i. 36;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief that strength of young people is in their hair in, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of initiation to the Kakian association in, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceremony, magical, to ensure fertility of women, i. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cetraro in Calabria, Easter custom at, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceylon, the king of, and his external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaco, the Gran, i. 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage custom of Indians of the, i. 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indians of the, i. 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Paraguayan, i. 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chadwick, Professor H. M., i. 103 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaka, Zulu king, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chalk, white, bodies of newly initiated lads coated with, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chambers, E. K., on the Celtic bisection of the year, i. 223</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Charcoal Man</q> at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charente Inférieure, department of, St. John's fires in the, i. 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chariot, patient drawn through the yoke of a, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chariots used by sacred persons, i. 4 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charlemagne, i. 270</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaste young men kindle need-fire, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chastity associated with abstinence from salt, i. 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Château-Tierry, Midsummer fires at, i. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chatham Islands, birth-trees in the, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Chavandes</hi>, bonfires, i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheadle, in Staffordshire, the Yule log at, i. 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheese, the Beltane, kept as a charm against the bewitching of milk-produce, i. 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chêne-Doré</foreign>, <q>the gilded oak,</q> in Perche, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chepstow oak, in Gloucestershire, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheremiss of the Volga, their Midsummer festival, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherokees, their sacred arks, i. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ideas as to trees struck by lightning, ii. <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherry-tree wood used for Yule log, i. 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees, torches thrown at, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chervil-seed burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 213</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chesnitsa</foreign>, Christmas cake, i. 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chester, Midsummer giants at, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chevannes</foreign>, bonfires, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheyenne Indians, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; women secluded at menstruation, i. 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiaromonte, Midsummer custom at, i. 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chibisa, an African chief, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chicha</foreign>, a native intoxicant, i. 57, 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chicory, the white flower of, opens all locks, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chief's daughter, ceremonies observed by her at puberty, i. 30, 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chikumbu, a Yao chief, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chilblains, the Yule log a preventive of, i. 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Childbirth, customs observed by women after, i. 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Childless couples leap over bonfires to procure offspring, i. 214, 338</l>
</lg>

<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>

<lg>
<l>Childless women creep through a holed stone, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Children live apart from their parents among the Baganda, i. 23 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>born feet foremost, curative power attributed to, 295;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passed across the Midsummer fires, 182, 189 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 192, 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passed through holes in ground or turf to cure them, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chillingworth, Thomas, passed through a cleft ash-tree for rupture, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chimney, witches fly up the, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -piece, divination by names on, i. 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>China, were-wolves in, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual ceremony of the new fire in, 136 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of fire to bar ghosts in, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirits of plants in snake form in, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of mugwort in, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chinese festival of fire, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story of the external soul, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theories as to the human soul, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chinook Indians, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chippeway Indians, their dread and seclusion of menstruous women, i. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiquites Indians of Paraguay, their theory of sickness, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chirbury, in Shropshire, the Yule log at, i. 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiriguanos of Bolivia, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Choctaw women secluded at menstruation, i. 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chopping-knife, soul of woman in childbirth transferred for safety to a, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chota Nagpur, the fire-walk in, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chouquet, in Normandy, the Green Wolf at, i. 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Christbrand</foreign>, the Yule log, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christenburg Crags, in Northumberland, Midsummer fires at, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian Church, its treatment of witches, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Christklotz</foreign>, the Yule log, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christmas, an old pagan festival of the sun, i. 246, 331 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>new fire made by the friction of wood at, 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe gathered at, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cake, i. 257, 259, 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; candle, the, i. 255, 256, 260</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve, cattle acquire the gift of speech on, i. 254;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>trees fumigated with wild thyme on, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fern blooms at, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches dreaded on, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sick children passed through cleft trees on, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; night, fern-seed blooms on, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; pig, i. 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; visiter, the, i. 261 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 263, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Church, the Christian, its treatment of witches, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bells on Midsummer Eve, custom as to ringing, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rung to drive away witches, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Churches used as places of divination at Hallowe'en, i. 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Churinga</foreign>, sacred sticks and stones of the Arunta, ii. <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chu-Tu-shi, a Chinese were-tiger, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ciotat, Midsummer rites of fire and water at, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumambulating fields with lighted torches, i. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumcision, custom at, among the Washamba, ii. <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of lads at initiation in Australia, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in New Guinea, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Fiji, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Rook, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of, on the Lower Congo, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Clach-nathrach</foreign>, serpent stone, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clam shell, sacred, of the Omahas, i. 11</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clan of the Cat, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clappers, used instead of church bells in Holy Week, i. 125;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wooden, used in China, 137</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Classificatory system of relationship, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Claudius, the emperor, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clavie, the burning of the, at Burghead, i. 266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clay plastered on girls at puberty, i. 31;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>white, bodies of novices at initiation smeared with, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleary, Bridget, burnt as a witch in Tipperary, i. 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Michael, burns his wife as a witch, i. 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clee, in Lincolnshire, the Yule log at, i. 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Hills, in Shropshire, fear of witchcraft in the, i. 342 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleft stick, passage through a, in connexion with puberty and circumcision, ii. <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Climacteris scandens</foreign>, women's <q>sister</q> among the Kulin, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clodd, Edward, on the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clog, the Yule, i. 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clonmel, trial for witch-burning at, i. 324</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clover, four-leaved, a counter-charm for witchcraft, i. 316;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clue of yarn, divination by a, i. 235, 240, 241, 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coal, magical, that turns to gold at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coast Murring tribe of New South Wales, the drama of resurrection exhibited to novices at initiation in the, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>

<lg>
<l>Cobern, effigy burnt at, i. 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coblentz, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Coccus Polonica</foreign> and St. John's blood, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cock, effigy of, in bonfire, i. iii;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a black, used as counter-charm to witchcraft, 321;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>white, burnt in Midsummer bonfire, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul of ogre in a, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed on harvest-field, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>red, killed to cure person struck by lightning, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; or hen, striking blindfold at a, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cock's blood poured on divining-rod, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cockchafer, external soul in a golden, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cockchafers, witches as, i. 322</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coco-nut, soul of child deposited in a, i. 154 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; palm planted over navel-string and afterbirth of child, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, compare <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attracts lightning, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Codrington, Dr. R. H., on the Melanesian conception of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Coel Coeth</foreign>, Hallowe'en bonfire, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cohen, S. S., i. 128 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coil, sick children passed through a, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cold food, festival of the, in China, i. 137</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cole, Lieut.-Colonel H. W. G., on a custom of the Lushais, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colic, popular remedies for, i. 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaping over bonfires as a preventive of, 107, 195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributed to witchcraft, 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coll, the Hole Stone in the island of, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colleda, an old Servian goddess, i. 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cologne, St. John's fourteen Midsummer victims at, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colombia, the Goajiras of, i. 34 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Guacheta in, 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Combe d'Ain, i. 114</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comminges, Midsummer fires in, i. 192 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Community, welfare of, bound up with the life of the divine king, i. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purified in the persons of its representatives, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Condé, in Normandy, i. 266</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conductivity, electric, of various kinds of wood, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conflagrations, bonfires supposed to protect against, i. 107, 108, 140, 142, 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brands of Midsummer bonfires thought to be a protection against, 165, 174, 183, 188, 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log a protection against, 248 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 250, 255, 256, 258;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer flowers a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mountain arnica a protection against, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak-mistletoe a protection against, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conflict of calendars, solar and lunar, i. 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congo, seclusion of girls at puberty on the Lower, i. 31;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees on the, 161 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theory of the external soul on the, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers on the, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the French, the Fans of, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Lower, rites of initiation on the, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Connaught, Midsummer fires in, i. 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cave of Cruachan in, 226;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>palace of the kings of, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Connemara, Midsummer fires in, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constance, the Lake of, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantinople, column at, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consumption, ashes of the Midsummer fires a cure for, i. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred to bird, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consumptive patients passed through holes in stones or rocks, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Continence as preparation for walking through fire, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conty, Lenten fires at, i. 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conway, Professor R. S., on the etymology of Soranus, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cook, A. B., on the oak of Errol, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cook, menstruous women not allowed to, i. 80, 82, 84, 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Copper needle, story of man who could only be killed by a, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corannas, a Hottentot people, children after an illness passed under an arch among the, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cords tied tightly round the bodies of girls at puberty, i. 92 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corea, custom observed after childbirth by women in, i. 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of torches to ensure good crops in, 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cormac, on Beltane fires, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cor-mass, procession of wicker giants at Dunkirk, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corn, charm to make the corn grow tall, i. 18;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thrown on the man who brings in the Yule log, 260, 262, 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blazing besoms flung aloft to make the corn grow high, 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -spirit in last standing corn, i. 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human representatives of, put to death, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in animal shape, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornel-tree wood used to kindle need-fire, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornwall, Snake Stones in, i. 15, 16 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 199 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt sacrifices to stay cattle-disease in, 300 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holed stone through which people used to creep in, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corpse, priest of Earth forbidden to see a, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>

<lg>
<l>Corpus Christi Day, processions on, i. 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corrèze and Creuse, departments of, St. John's fires in the, i. 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corsica, Midsummer fires in, i. 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cos, effigies of Judas burnt at Easter in, i. 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cosquin, E., on helpful animals and external souls in folk-tales, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Cosse de Nau</foreign>, the Yule log, i. 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Costa Rica, Indians of, their customs in fasts, i. 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonial uncleanness among the, 65 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Bri-bri Indians of, 86;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Guatusos of, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coudreau, H., quoted, i. 63 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coulommiers, in France, notion as to mistletoe at, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Counter-charm for witchcraft, <q>scoring above the breath,</q> i. 316 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Couples married within the year obliged to dance by torchlight, i. 115, 339</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coventry, Midsummer giants at, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cows, witches steal milk from, i. 343;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe given to, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>milked through a hole in a branch or a <q>witch's nest,</q> <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crackers burnt to frighten ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cracow, Midsummer fires in the district of, i. 175</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cream, ceremony for thickening, i. 262</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creek Indians, their dread of menstruous women, i. 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creeping through a tunnel as a remedy for an epidemic, i. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>through cleft trees as cure for various maladies, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>through narrow openings in order to escape ghostly pursuers, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creuse and Corrèze, departments of, St. John's fires in the, i. 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Criminals shorn to make them confess, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Croatia, Midsummer fires in, i. 178</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Croats of Istria, their belief as to the activity of witches on Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crocodile, a Batta totem, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crocodiles, fat of, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lives of persons bound up with those of, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external human souls in, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cronus, cakes offered to, i. 153 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crops supposed to be spoiled by menstruous women, i. 79, 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaping over bonfires to ensure good, 107;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires thought to ensure good, 188, 336;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torches swung by eunuchs to ensure good, 340;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bull-roarers sounded to promote the growth of the, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross River natives, their lives bound up with those of certain animals, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -roads, ceremonies at, i. 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches at, 160 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires lighted at, 172, 191;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at, 229;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bewitched things burnt at, 322</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crosses chalked up to protect houses and cattle-stalls against witches, i. 160 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crow, hooded, sacrifice to, i. 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Crowdie</foreign>, a dish of milk and meal, i. 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Crown'/>
<l>Crown or garland of flowers in Midsummer bonfire, i. 184, 185, 188, 192;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Roses, festival of the, 195.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Flowers'>Flowers</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cruachan, the herdsman or king of, Argyleshire story of, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Connaught, the cave of, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cryptocerus atratus</foreign>, F., stinging ants, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuissard, Ch., on Midsummer fires, i. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cumae, the Sibyl at, i. 99</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cumanus, inquisitor, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cumberland, Midsummer fires in, i. 197</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cups, special, used by girls at puberty, i. 50, 53</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curative powers ascribed to persons born feet foremost, i. 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cures, popular, prescribed by Marcellus of Bordeaux, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cursing a mist in Switzerland, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuzco, ceremony of the new fire in, i. 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cycle of thirty years (Druidical), ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cycles of sixty years (Boeotian, Indian, and Tibetan), ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cythnos, Greek island, sickly children pushed through a hole in a rock in, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Czechs cull simples at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dacotas or Sioux, ritual of death and resurrection among the, ii. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daedala, Boeotian festival of the Great, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dairy, mistletoe used to make the dairy thrive, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daizan, king of Atrae, i. 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalhousie Castle, the Edgewell Tree at, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalmatia, the Yule log in, i. 263</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalyell, J. G., on Beltane, i. 149 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damun, in German New Guinea, ceremony of initiation at, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danae, the story of, i. 73 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dance at Sipi in Northern India, i. 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of young women at puberty, ii. <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the grave at initiation, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in honour of the big or grey wolf, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>

<lg>
<l>Dances of fasting men and women at festival, i. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Duk-duk society, 11;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of girls at puberty, 28, 29, 30, 37, 42, 50, 58, 59;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>round bonfires, 108, 109, 110, 111, 114, 116, 120, 131, 142, 145, 148, 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 159, 166, 172, 173, 175, 178, 182, 183, 185, 187, 188, 189, 191, 193, 194, 195, 198, 246, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>masked, bull-roarers used at, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of novices at initiation, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dancing with the fairies at Hallowe'en, i. 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dandelions gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danger apprehended from the sexual relation, ii. <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dangers thought to attend women at menstruation, i. 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danish stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; story of a girl who was forbidden to see the sun, i. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Danserosse</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>danseresse</foreign>, a stone, i. 110</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danube, worship of Grannus on the, i. 112</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danzig, the immortal lady of, i. 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Daphne gnidium</foreign> gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dapper, O., on ritual of death and resurrection at initiation in the Belli-Paaro society, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Daramulun'/>
<l>Daramulun, a mythical being who instituted and superintends the initiation of lads in Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his voice heard in the sound of the bull-roarer, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Thrumalun'>Thrumalun</ref> and <ref target='Index-Thuremlin'>Thuremlin</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Darding Knife,</q> pretence of death and resurrection at initiation to the, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darling River, the Ualaroi of the, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darma Rajah, Hindoo god, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darowen, in Wales, Midsummer fires at, i. 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darwin, Charles, on the cooling of the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darwin, Sir Francis, on the Golden Bough, ii. <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dashers of churns, witches ride on, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Date of Chinese festival changed, i. 137</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dathi, king of Ireland, and his Druid, i. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davies, J. Ceredig, as to witches in Wales, i. 321 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dawn of the Day, prayers to the, i. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 53;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prayer of adolescent girl to the, 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dawson, James, on sex totems in Victoria, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dead, festival of the, i. 223 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 225 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of the, sit round the Midsummer fire, 183, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of reindeer to the, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incarnate in serpents, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bull-roarers sounded at festivals of the, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first-fruits offered to the souls of the, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Death, carrying out,</q> i. 119;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>the burying of,</q> 119;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigies of, burnt in spring fires, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omens of, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs observed by mourners after a death in order to escape from the ghost, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with the sun, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Death and resurrection, ritual of, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Australia, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in New Guinea, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Fiji, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Rook, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in New Britain, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Ceram, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Africa, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in North America, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traces of it elsewhere, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Debregeasia velutina</foreign>, used to kindle fire by friction, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>December, the last day of, Hogmanay, i. 266;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the twenty-first, St. Thomas's Day, 266</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decle, L., quoted, i. 4 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dee, holed stone used by childless women in the Aberdeenshire, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deer and the family of Lachlin, superstition concerning, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deffingin, in Swabia, Midsummer bonfires at, i. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dehon, P., on witches as cats among the Oraons, ii. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Deiseal'/>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Deiseal</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>deisheal</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>dessil</foreign>, the right-hand turn, in the Highlands of Scotland, i. 150 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delagoa Bay, the Thonga of, i. 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delaware Indians, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delivery, charms to ensure women an easy, i. 49, 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>women creep through a rifted rock to obtain an easy, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delmenhorst, in Oldenburg, Easter fires at, i. 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delos, new fire brought from, i. 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delphi, perpetual fire at, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the picture of Orpheus at, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Stheni, near, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demeter, the torches of, i. 340 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>serpents in the worship of, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demnat, in the Atlas, New Year rites at, i. 217, 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demon supposed to attack girls at puberty, i. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of fire instituted to ban a, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Demons'/>
<l>Demons attack women at puberty and childbirth, i. 24 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled at the New Year, 134 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abroad on Midsummer Eve, 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ashes of holy
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
fires a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vervain a protection against, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guard treasures, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Evil-Spirits'>Evil Spirits</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Déné or Tinneh Indians, their dread and seclusion of menstruous women, i. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Western, tattooing among the, 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Tinneh'>Tinneh</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Denham Tracts</foreign>, on need-fire in Yorkshire, i. 287 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denmark, fires on St. John's Eve in, i. 171;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passing sick children through a hole in the ground in, 190, 191;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through a cleft oak as a cure for rupture or rickets in, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Dessil.</foreign> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Deiseal'><foreign rend='italic'>Deiseal</foreign></ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deux-Sèvres, department of, Midsummer fires in the, i. 191;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires on All Saints' Day in the, 245 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devil, the, seen on Midsummer Eve, i. 208</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devil's bit, St. John's wort, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devils, ghosts, and hobgoblins abroad on Midsummer Eve, i. 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devonshire, need-fire in, i. 288;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>animals burnt alive as a sacrifice in, 302;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in witchcraft in, 302;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crawling under a bramble as a cure for whooping-cough in, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dew, rolling in the, at Midsummer, i. 208, with <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Midsummer a protection against witchcraft, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diana and Juno, ii. <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diana, priest of, at Nemi, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diana's Mirror, the Lake of Nemi, ii. <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dieri of Central Australia, their dread of women at menstruation, i. 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bleed themselves to make rain, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dijon, Lenten fires at, i, 114</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dingle, church of St. Brandon near, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diodorus Siculus, on the human sacrifices of the Celts, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dioscorides on mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dipping for apples at Hallowe'en, i. 237, 239, 241, 242, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Discs, burning, thrown into the air, i. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 119, 143, 165, 166, 168 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 172, 328, 334;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burning, perhaps directed at witches, 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disease, walking through fire as a remedy for, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conceived as something physical that can be stripped off the patient and left behind, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diseases of cattle ascribed to witchcraft, i. 343</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dish, external soul of warlock in a, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dishes, special, used by girls at puberty, i. 47, 49</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dislocation, Roman cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divination on St. John's Night (Midsummer Eve), i. 173, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Midsummer in Spain and the Azores, i. 208 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Hallowe'en, 225, 228 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by stones at Hallowe'en fires, 230 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 239, 240;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by stolen kail, 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 241;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by clue of yarn, 235, 240, 241, 243;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by hemp seed, 235, 241, 245;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by winnowing-basket, 236;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by thrown shoe, 236;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by wet shirt, 236, 241;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by white of eggs, 236 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 238;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by apples in water, 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by a ring, 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by names on chimney-piece, 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by three plates or basins, 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 240, 244;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by nuts in fire, 237, 239, 241, 242, 245;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by salt cake, or salt herring, 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the sliced apple, 238;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by eavesdropping, 238, 243, 244;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by knife, 241;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by briar-thorn, 242;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by melted lead, 242;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by cabbages, 242;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by cake at Hallowe'en, 242, 243;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by ashes, 243, 244, 245;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by salt, 244;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by raking a rick, 247;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magic dwindles into, 336.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Divining-Rod'>Divining-rod</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divine personages not allowed to touch the ground with their feet, i. 2 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to see the sun, 18 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suspended for safety between heaven and earth, 98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Divining-Rod'/>
<l>Divining-rod cut on Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made of hazel, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made of mistletoe in Sweden, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made of four sorts of wood, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made of willow, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made out of a parasitic rowan, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divisibility of life, doctrine of the, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dobischwald, in Silesia, need-fire at, i. 278</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dodona, Zeus and his sacred oak at, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dog not allowed to enter priest's house, i. 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beaten to ensure woman's fertility, 69;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charm against the bite of a mad, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Batta totem, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Star, or Sirius, supposed by the ancients to cause the heat of summer, i. 332</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dolac, need-fire at, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dolmen, sick children passed through a hole in a, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dommartin, Lenten fires at, i. 109</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Door, separate, for girls at puberty, i. 43, 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doorie, hill of, at Burghead, i. 267</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doors, separate, used by menstruous women, i. 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doorway, creeping through narrow opening in, as a cure, ii. <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>


<lg>
<l>Dosadhs, an Indian caste, the fire-walk among the, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dosuma, king of, not allowed to touch the ground, i. 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Douay, procession of the giants at, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Double-axe, Midsummer king of the, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dourgne, in Southern France, crawling through holed stones near, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dove, the ceremony of the fiery, at Easter in Florence, i. 126;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Batta totem, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doves, external soul of magicians in, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Aeneas led by doves to the Golden Bough, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dragon at Midsummer, effigy of, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul of a queen in a, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the water-mill, Servian story of the, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dragons driven away by smoke of Midsummer bonfires, i. 161;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. Peter's fires lighted to drive away, 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Draguignan, in the department of Var, Midsummer fires at, i. 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Draupadi, the heroine of the <hi rend='italic'>Mahabharata</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dread and seclusion of menstruous women, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread of witchcraft in Europe, 342</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dream, guardian spirit or animal acquired in a, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dreaming on flowers on Midsummer Eve, i. 175</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dreams, oracular, i. 238, 242;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of love on Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prophetic, on the bloom of the oak, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prophetic, on mistletoe, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Driving away the witches on Walpurgis Night, i. 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Midsummer, 170, 171</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drobede (Draupadi), the heroine of the epic <hi rend='italic'>Mahabharata</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drömling district, in Hanover, need-fire in, i. 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drought attributed to misconduct of young girls, i. 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Druid, etymology of the word, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Druidical custom of burning live animals, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the animals perhaps deemed embodiments of witches, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festivals, so-called, of the Scotch Highlanders, i. 147, 206</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrifices, W. Mannhardt's theory of the, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Druidism, so-called, remains of, i. 233, 241;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Christian Church in relation to witchcraft, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Druid's Glass, the, i. 16; prediction, the, 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Druids' Hill, the, i. 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Druids, their superstition as to <q>serpents' eggs,</q> i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their human sacrifices, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to the Midsummer festival, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of the mistletoe and the oak, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their cycle of thirty years, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>catch the mistletoe in a white cloth, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Ireland, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drynemetum, <q>the temple of the oak,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duck baked alive as a sacrifice in Suffolk, i. 304</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duck's egg, external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duk-duk, secret society of New Britain, i. 11, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duke of York Island, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Duk-duk society in, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exogamous classes in, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duke Town, on the Calabar River, ii. <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dukkala, New Year customs in, i. 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dumbartonshire, Hallowe'en in, i. 237 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunbeath, in Caithness, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunkeld, i. 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunkirk, procession of giants on Midsummer Day at, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durandus, G. (W. Durantis), his <hi rend='italic'>Rationale Divinorum Officiorum</hi>, i. 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durham, Easter candle in the cathedral of, i. 122 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durris, parish of, Kincardineshire, Midsummer fires in the, i. 206 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dusk of the Evening, prayers to the, i. 53</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Düsseldorf, Shrove Tuesday custom in the district of, i. 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dutch names for mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dwarf-elder at Midsummer detects witchcraft, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dyaks of Borneo, trees and plants as life indices among the, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their doctrine of the plurality of souls, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Landak and Tajan, marriage custom of the, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees among the, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Pinoeh, their custom at a birth, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eagle, sacrifice to, i. 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bone, used to drink out of, i. 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; clan, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -hawk, external soul of medicine-man in, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -spirits and buried treasures, i. 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Earth, taboos observed by the priest of, in Southern Nigeria, i. 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prayers to, 50;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and heaven, between, 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Easter, fern-seed blooms at, ii. <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; candle, i. 121, 122, 125</l>
</lg>

<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ceremonies in the New World, i. 127 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; eggs, i. 108, 143, 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve, new fire on, i. 121, 124, 126, 158;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fern blooms at, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fires, i. 120 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Man, burning the, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Monday, fire-custom on, i. 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mountains, bonfires on, i. 140, 141</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Saturday, new fire on, i. 121, 122, 124, 127, 128, 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod baptized on, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sunday, red eggs on, i. 122</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eavesdropping, divination by, i. 238, 243, 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Echternach in Luxemburg, Lenten fire-custom at, i. 116</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eclipses attributed to monster biting the sun or moon, i. 70;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>air thought to be poisoned at, 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be caused by a monster attacking the luminary, 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Edda</hi>, the prose, story of Balder in, i. 101;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the poetic, story of Balder in, 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eddesse, in Hanover, need-fire at, i. 275 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edersleben, Midsummer fire-custom at, i. 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edgewell Tree, oak at castle of Dalhousie, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Effect, supposed, of killing a totem animal, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Effigies burnt in bonfires, i. 106, 107, 116, 118 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 119 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 121, 122, 159, 167;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Judas burnt at Easter, 121, 127 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 130 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in the Midsummer fires, 172 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 195;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of witches burnt in the fires, 342, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of human beings burnt in the fires, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of giants burnt in the summer fires, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Effigy of absent friend cut in a tree, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Efik, a tribe of Calabar, their belief in external or bush souls, ii. <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egede, Hans, on impregnation by the moon, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egg broken in water, divination by means of, i. 208 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eggs, charm to ensure plenty of, i. 112, 338;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>begged for at Midsummer, 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by white of, 236 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 238;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external souls of fairy beings in, ii. <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Easter, i. 108, 122, 143, 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, the Flight into, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deified kings of, their souls deposited during life in portrait statues, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptian, ancient, story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; doctrine of the <foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign> or external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tombs, plaques or palettes of schist in, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptians, human sacrifices among the, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eifel Mountains, Lenten fires in the, i. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 336 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cobern in the, 120;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's fires in the, 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in the, 248;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer flowers in the, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eighty-one (nine times nine), men make need-fire, i. 289, 294, 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eket, in North Calabar, ii. <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ekoi, a tribe of Calabar, their belief in external or bush souls, ii. <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Elangela</foreign>, external soul in Fan language, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elbe, the river, dangerous on Midsummer Day, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elder-flowers gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elecampane in a popular remedy, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Electric conductivity of various kinds of wood, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elephant hunters, custom of, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elephants, lives of persons bound up with those of, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external human souls in, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elgin, medical use of mistletoe in, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elk clan of the Omaha Indians, i. 11</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elm wood used to kindle need-fire, i. 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Embers of bonfires planted in fields, i. 117, 121;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stuck in cabbage gardens, 174, 175;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>promote growth of crops, 337.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Ashes'>Ashes</ref> <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> <ref target='Index-Sticks-Charred'>Sticks, charred</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Midsummer fires a protection against conflagration, i. 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against lightning, 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emily plain of Central Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emmenthal, in Switzerland, superstition as to Midsummer Day in the, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of orpine at Midsummer in the, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emu fat not allowed to touch the ground, i. 13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wren, called men's <q>brother</q> among the Kurnai, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Encounter Bay tribe in South Australia, their dread of women at menstruation, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Energy, sanctity and uncleanness, different forms of the same mysterious, i. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>England, belief as to menstruous women in, i. 96 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 196 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 255 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the need-fire in, 286 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer giants in, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by orpine at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the north of, mistletoe used to make the dairy thrive in, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees in, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through cleft ash-trees as a cure for rupture or rickets in, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak-mistletoe in, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>English cure for whooping-cough, rheumatism, and boils, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ensival, bonfires at, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Entrails, external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Epic of Kings</hi>, Firdusi's, i. 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epidemic, creeping through a tunnel as a remedy for an, i. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epilepsy, yellow mullein a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe a cure for, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Épinal, Lenten fires at, i. 109</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eriskay, fairies at Hallowe'en in, i. 226;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>salt cake at Hallowe'en in, 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Errol, the Hays of, their fate bound up with oak-mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Escouvion'/>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Escouvion</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Scouvion</foreign>, the Great and the Little, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esquimaux, their superstition as to various meats, i. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls at puberty among the, 55;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of the new fire among the, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom at eclipses, 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Alaska, child's soul deposited in a bag among the, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Bering Strait, their belief as to menstruous women, i. 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esthonia, bathing at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>flowers gathered for divination and magic at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esthonians, Midsummer fires among the, i. 179 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Oesel cull St. John's herbs on St. John's Day, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eteobutads as umbrella-bearers at the festival of Scira, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eton, Midsummer fires at, i. 197</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eunuchs perform a ceremony for the fertility of the fields, i. 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Euphorbia lathyris</foreign>, caper-spurge, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euripides, his play on Meleager, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Europe, superstitions as to menstruous women in, i. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fire-festivals of, 106 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>great dread of witchcraft in, 342;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees in, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in, that strength of witches and wizards is in their hair, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eurydice, Orpheus and, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eve of Samhain (Hallowe'en) in Ireland, i. 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Everek (Caesarea), in Asia Minor, creeping through a rifted rock at, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evil eye, protection against, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; spirit, mode of cure for possession by an, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Evil-Spirits'/>
<l>Evil spirits driven away at the New Year, i. 134 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept off by fire, 282, 285 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's herbs a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept off by flowers gathered at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creeping through cleft trees to escape the pursuit of, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Demons'>Demons</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ewe negroes, their dread of menstruous women, i. 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exogamous classes in Duke of York island, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exorcizing vermin with torches, i. 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exorcism of evil spirits, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and ordeals, 66;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Easter, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of St. John's wort in, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of mugwort in, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by vervain, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Expulsion of demons, annual, i. 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>External soul in folk-tales, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in folk-custom, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in inanimate things, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in plants, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in animals, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept in totem, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Souls, External</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Extinction of common fires before the kindling of the need-fire, i. 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 279, 283, 285, 288, 289, 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 291, 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 292, 294, 297, 298 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonial, of fires, ii. <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eye, the evil, cast on cattle, i. 302, 303;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oleander a protection against the, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eyes, looking through flowers at the Midsummer fire, thought to be good for the, i. 162, 163, 165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 171, 174 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ashes or smoke of Midsummer fire supposed to benefit the, 214 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sore, attributed to witchcraft, 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mugwort a protection against sore, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of newly initiated lads closed, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eyre, E. J., on menstruous women in Australia, i. 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Faery dairts</q> thought to kill cattle, i. 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Failles</foreign>, bonfires, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fair, great, at Uisnech in County Meath, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fairies let loose at Hallowe'en, i. 224 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carry off men's wives, 227;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Hallowe'en, dancing with the, 227;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to kill cattle by their darts, 303;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>active on Hallowe'en and May Day, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fairy changelings, i. 151 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Falcon stone, at Errol, in Perthshire, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Falkenstein chapel of St. Wolfgang, creeping through a rifted rock near the, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Falling sickness, mistletoe a remedy for, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>

<lg>
<l>Famenne in Namur, Lenten fires in, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Familiar spirits of wizards in boars, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fans of the French Congo, birth-trees among the, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Gaboon, their theory of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guardian spirits acquired in dreams among the, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of West Africa, custom at end of mourning among the, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fast at puberty, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fasting of girls at puberty, i. 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 66;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of women at menstruation, 93, 94;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as preparation for gathering magical plants, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; men and women at a dancing festival, i. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fasts imposed on heirs to thrones in South America, i. 19;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rules observed in, 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fat of emu not allowed to touch the ground, i. 13;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of crocodiles and snakes as unguent, 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fattening-house for girls in Calabar, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feast of Florus and Lauras on August 18th, i. 220;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Nativity of the Virgin, 220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of All Souls, 223 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 225 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Fechenots</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>fechenottes</foreign>, Valentines, i. 110</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feet foremost, children born, curative power attributed to, i. 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fen-hall, i. 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferintosh district, in Scotland, i. 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fern in a popular remedy, i. 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the male (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Aspidium filix mas</foreign>), superstitions as 10, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; owl or goatsucker, sex totem of women, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -seed gathered on Midsummer Eve, magical properties ascribed to, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blooms on Midsummer Eve, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blooms on Christmas Night, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reveals treasures in the earth, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brought by Satan on Christmas night, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered at the solstices, Midsummer Eve and Christmas, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>procured by shooting at the sun on Midsummer Day, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blooms at Easter, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feronia, Italian goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferrara, synod of, denounces practice of gathering fern-seed, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fertility of women, magical ceremony to ensure, i. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 31;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of fields, processions with lighted torches to ensure the, 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the land supposed to depend on the number of human beings sacrificed, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fertilization of mango trees, ceremony for the, i. 10</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fertilizing fields with ashes of Midsummer fires, i. 170</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Festival of the cold food in China, i. 137;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Chinese, shifted in the calendar, 137;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Cross on August 1st, 220;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Dead, 223 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 225 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fetish, the great, in West Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fever, leaping over the Midsummer bonfires as a preventive of, i. 166, 173, 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires a protection against, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire kindled to prevent, 297;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure for, in India, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Fey</foreign>, devoted, i. 231</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fez, Midsummer custom at, i. 216, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Field-mice, burning torches as a protection against, i. 114, 115</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and moles driven away by torches, ii. <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fields, cultivated, menstruous women not allowed to enter, i. 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protected against insects by menstruous women, 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>processions with torches through, 107 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 110 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 113 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 179, 339 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protected against witches, 121;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made fruitful by bonfires, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fertilized by ashes of Midsummer fires, 170;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fertilized by burning wheel rolled over them, 191, 340 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protected against hail by bonfires, 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fig-trees, charm to benefit, i. 18; sacred among the Fans, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fights between men and women about their sex totems, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Figo</foreign>, bonfire, i. 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiji, brides tattooed in, i. 34 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fire-walk in, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees in, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the drama of death and resurrection exhibited to novices at initiation in, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Filey, in Yorkshire, the Yule log and candle at, i. 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finchra, mountain in Rum, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fingan Eve in the Isle of Man, i. 266</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finistère, bonfires on St. John's Day in, i. 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finland, Midsummer fires in, i. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fir-tree as life-index in, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finsch Harbour in German New Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fir-branches, prayers to, i. 51;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Midsummer, 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer mummers clad in, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -cones, seeds of, gathered on St. John's Day, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tree as life-index, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe on fir-trees, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wood used to kindle need-fire, i. 278, 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; or beech used to make the Yule log, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>

<lg>
<l>Firdusi's <hi rend='italic'>Epic of Kings</hi>, i. 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Fire'/>
<l>Fire, girls at puberty forbidden to see or go near, i. 29, 45, 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>menstruous women not allowed to touch or see, 84, 85;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extinguished at menstruation, 87;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in fire-festivals, different possible explanations of its use, 112 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made by flints or by flint and steel, 121, 124, 126, 127, 145, 146, 159;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made by a burning-glass, 121, 127;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made by a metal mirror, 132, 137, 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made by the friction of wood, 132, 133, 135, 136, 137, 138, 144 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 148, 155, 169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 175, 177, 179, 220, 264, 270 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 335 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be blown up with breath, i. 133;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>year called a fire, 137;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to grow weak with age, 137;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pretence of throwing a man into, 148, 186, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried round houses, corn, cattle, and women after child-bearing, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to drive away witches and demons at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a protection against evil spirits, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made by means of a wheel, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a destructive and purificatory agent, i. 341;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used as a charm to produce sunshine, 341 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed as a barrier against ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a purificatory agency, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to burn or ban witches, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extinguished by mistletoe, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of oak-wood used to detect a murderer, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life of man bound up with a, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perpetual, of oak-wood, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conceived by savages as a property stored like sap in trees, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>primitive ideas as to the origin of, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, living, made by friction of wood, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, new, kindled on Easter Saturday, i. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festivals of new, 131 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made by the friction of wood at Christmas, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; of heaven,</q> term applied to Midsummer bonfire, i. 334, 335</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -drill used to kindle need-fire, i. 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire-festivals of Europe, i. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interpretation of the, 328 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the solstices, i. 331 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>solar theory of the, 331 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purificatory theory of the, 341 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as a protection against witchcraft, 342;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the purificatory theory of the, more probable than the solar theory, 346;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>elsewhere than in Europe, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in India, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in China, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Japan, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Fiji, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Tahiti, the Marquesas Islands, and Trinidad, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Africa, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in classical antiquity in Cappadocia and Italy, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their relation to Druidism, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire-god, Armenian, i. 131 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Iroquois, prayers to the, 299 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -walk, the, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a remedy for disease, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the meaning of the, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firebrand, external soul of Meleager in a, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firebrands, the Sunday of the, i. 110, 114</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Fires'/>
<l>Fires extinguished as preliminary to obtaining new fire, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annually extinguished and relit, 132 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to burn the witches on the Eve of May Day (Walpurgis Night), 159 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>autumn, 220 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the need-fire, 269 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extinguished before the lighting of the need-fire, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 279, 283, 285, 288, 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 291, 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 292, 294, 297, 298 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the fire-festivals explained as sun-charms, 329, 331 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explained as purificatory, 329 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 341 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the burning of human beings in the, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perpetual, fed with oak-wood, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with pinewood, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the solstitial, perhaps sun-charms, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extinguished and relighted from a flame kindled by lightning, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Fire'>Fire</ref>, <ref target='Index-Bonfires'>Bonfires</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Beltane, i. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Easter, i. 120 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Hallowe'en, i. 222 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 230 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Lenten, i. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Midsummer, i. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against witches, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to stop rain, 188, 336;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to be a preventive of backache in reaping, 189, 344 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against fever, 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Midwinter, i. 246 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of St. John in France, i. 183, 188, 189, 190, 192, 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; on the Eve of Twelfth Day, i. 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>First-born lamb, wool of, used as cure for colic, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sons make need-fire, i. 294;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>special magical virtue attributed to, 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>First-fruits offered to the souls of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fish frightened or killed by proximity of menstruous women, i. 77, 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>golden, external soul of girl in a, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lives of people bound up with, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fisheries supposed to be spoiled by menstruous women, i. 77, 78, 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fison, Rev. Lorimer, on Fijian religion, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 2, 3, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>

<lg>
<l>Fittleworth, in Sussex, cleft ash-trees used for the cure of rupture at, ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flames of bonfires, omens drawn from, i. 159, 165, 336</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flanders, Midsummer fires in, i. 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wicker giants in, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flax, leaping over bonfires to make the flax grow tall, i. 119;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charms to make flax grow tall, 165, 166, 173, 174, 176, 180</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; crop, omens of the, drawn from Midsummer bonfires, i. 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; seed sown in direction of flames of bonfire, i. 140, 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fleabane as a cure for headache, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fleas, leaping over Midsummer fires to get rid of, i. 211, 212, 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flight into Egypt, the, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flints, fire kindled by, i. 121, 124, 126, 127, 145, 146, 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Floor, sitting on the, at Christmas, i. 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florence, ceremony of the new fire at Easter in, i. 126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florus and Laurus, feast of, on August 18th, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Flowers'/>
<l>Flowers thrown on bonfire, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external souls in, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Crown'>Crown</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and herbs cast into the Midsummer bonfires, i. 162, 163, 172, 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; at Midsummer thrown on roofs as a protection against lightning, i. 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of, 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as talismans, 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in fires, 184, 188, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wreaths of, hung over doors and windows, 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>placed on mouths of wells, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination from, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; on Midsummer Eve, blessed by St. John, i. 171;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the magic flowers of Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in divination, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to dream upon, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flutes, sacred, played at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fly River, in British New Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Flying-rowan</q> (parasitic rowan), superstitions in regard to, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to make a divining-rod, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foam of the sea, the demon Namuci killed by the, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the totem of a clan in India, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fo-Kien, province of China, festival of fire in, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Folgareit, in the Tyrol, Midsummer custom at, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Folk-custom, external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tales, the external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Follies of Dunkirk, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Food, sacred, not allowed to touch the ground, i. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girls at puberty not allowed to handle, 23, 28, 36, 40 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foods, forbidden, i. 4, 7, 19, 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 54, 56, 57, 58, 68, 77, 78, 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Fool's Stone</q> in ashes of Midsummer fire, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forbidden thing of clan, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forchheim, in Bavaria, the burning of Judas at Easter in, i. 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foreskins of young men offered to ancestral spirits in Fiji, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forespeaking men and cattle, i. 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forgetfulness of the past after initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forked shape of divining-rod, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Forlorn fire,</q> need-fire, i. 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Foulères</foreign>, bonfires, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foulkes, Captain, quoted, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Four kinds of wood used to make the divining-rod, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fourdin, E., on the procession of the giants at Ath, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Four-leaved clover, a counter-charm for witchcraft, i. 316;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Midsummer useful for magic, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fowler, W. Warde, on Midsummer custom, i. 206 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on <hi rend='italic'>sexta luna,</hi> ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the ceremony of passing under the yoke, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the oak and the thunder-god, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fowls' nests, ashes of bonfires put in, i, 112, 338</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fox prayed to spare lambs, i. 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foxes burnt in Midsummer fires, ii. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches turn into, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foxwell, Ernest, on the fire-walk in Japan, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fraas, F., on the various sorts of mistletoe known to the ancients, ii. <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frampton-on-Severn in Gloucestershire, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>France, Lenten fires in, i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 181 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires on All Saints' Day in, 245 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 249 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wonderful herbs gathered on St. John's Eve (Midsummer Eve) in, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mugwort (herb of St. John) at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>judicial treatment of sorcerers in, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees in, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through a cleft oak as a cure for rupture or rickets in, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-French'>French</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franche-Comté, Lenten fires in, i. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires of St. John in, 189;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 254</l>
</lg>

<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>

<lg>
<l>Franken, Middle, fire custom at Easter in, i. 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frankenstein, precautions against witches in, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fraser Lake in British Columbia, i. 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freiburg, in Switzerland, Lenten fires in, i. 119;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern and treasure on St. John's Night in, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freising, in Bavaria, creeping through a narrow opening in the cathedral of, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-French'/>
<l>French cure for whooping-cough, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Islands, use of bull-roarers in, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; peasants, their superstition as to a virgin and a flame, i. 137 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Friction of wood, fire made by the, i. 132, 133, 135, 136, 137, 138, 144 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 148, 155, 169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 175, 177, 179, 220, 264, 270 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 335 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the most primitive mode of making fire, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Friendly Society of the Spirit</q> among the Naudowessies, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frigg or Frigga, the goddess, and Balder, i. 101, 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fringes worn over the eyes by girls at puberty, i. 47, 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fruit-trees threatened, i. 114;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires lit under, 215;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shaken at Christmas to make them bear fruit, 248;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fumigated with smoke of need-fire, 280;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fertilized by burning torches, 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fuga daemonum</foreign>, St. John's wort, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fulda, the Lord of the Wells at, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fumigating crops with smoke of bonfires, i. 201, 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sheep and cattle, ii. <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fumigation of pastures at Midsummer to drive away witches and demons, i. 170;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of fruit-trees, nets, and cattle with smoke of need-fire, 280;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of byres with juniper, 296;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of trees with wild thyme on Christmas Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fünen, in Denmark, cure for childish ailments at, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Funeral, customs observed by mourners after a funeral in order to escape from the ghost, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ceremony among the Michemis, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Furnace, walking through a fiery, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Furness, W. H., on passing under an archway, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 180 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gabb, W. M., on ceremonial uncleanness, i. 65 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gablonz, in Bohemia, Midsummer bed of flowers at, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaboon, birth-trees in the, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theory of the external soul in, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gacko, need-fire at, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaidoz, H., on the custom of passing sick people through cleft trees, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gage, Thomas, on <foreign rend='italic'>naguals</foreign> among the Indians of Guatemala, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaj, in Slavonia, need-fire at, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galatian senate met in Drynemetum, <q>the temple of the oak,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galatians kept their old Celtic speech, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galela, dread of women at menstruation in, i. 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galelareese of Halmahera, their rites of initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallic Councils, their prohibition of carrying torches, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallows Hill, magical plants gathered on the, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -rope used to kindle need-fire, i. 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gandersheim, in Brunswick, need-fire at, i. 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gap, in the High Alps, cats roasted alive in the Midsummer fire at, ii. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gardner, Mrs. E. A., i. 131 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garlands of flowers placed on wells at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thrown on trees, a form of divination, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garlic roasted at Midsummer fires, i. 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garonne, Midsummer fires in the valley of the, i. 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gatschet, A. S., on the Toukawe Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaul, <q>serpents' eggs</q> in ancient, i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices in ancient, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gauls, their fortification walls, i. 267 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gazelle Peninsula, New Britain, the Ingniet society in the, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gem, external soul of magician in a, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul of giant in a, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geneva, Midsummer fires in the canton of, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Genius</foreign>, the Roman, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geranium burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 213</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerhausen, i. 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>German stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germans, human sacrifices offered by the ancient, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the oak sacred among the, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germany, Lenten fires in, i. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter bonfires in, 140 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom at eclipses in, 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Midsummer fires in, 163 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 247 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in the transformation of witches into animals in, 321 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>colic, sore eyes, and stiffness of the
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
back attributed to witchcraft in, 344 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mugwort at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>orpine gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe a remedy for epilepsy in, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the need-fire kindled by the friction of oak in, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak-wood used to make up cottage fires on Midsummer Day in, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees in, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through a cleft oak as a cure for rupture in, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gestr and the spae-wives, Icelandic story of, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gewar, King of Norway, i. 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghost, oracular, in a cave, ii. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghosts extracted from wooden posts, i. 8;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fire used to get rid of, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mugwort a protection against, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept off by thorn bushes, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creeping through cleft sticks to escape from, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giant who had no heart in his body, stories of the, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mythical, supposed to kill and resuscitate lads at initiation, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giant-fennel burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 213</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giants of wicker-work at popular festivals in Europe, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in the summer bonfires, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giggenhausen, in Bavaria, burning the Easter Man at, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gion shrine in Japan, i. 138</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gippsland, the Kurnai of, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giraldus Cambrensis on transformation of witches into hares, i. 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Girdle of wolf's hide worn by were-wolves, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of St. John, mugwort, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Girdles of mugwort worn on St. John's Day or Eve as preservative against backache, sore eyes, ghosts, magic, and sickness, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Girkshausen, in Westphalia, the Yule log at, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Girl at puberty said to be wounded by a snake, i. 56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to be swallowed by a serpent, 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and boy produce need-fire by friction of wood, 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Girls at puberty, secluded, i. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to touch the ground, 22, 33, 35, 36, 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to see the sun, 22, 35, 36, 37, 41, 44, 46, 47, 68;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to handle food, 23, 28, 36, 40 sq., 42; half buried in ground, 38 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to scratch themselves with their fingers, 38, 39, 41, 42, 44, 47, 50, 53, 92;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to lie down, 44;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gashed on back, breast, and belly, 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stung by ants, 61;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beaten severely, 61, 66 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to be attacked by a demon, 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to see the sky, 69;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forbidden to break bones of hares, 73 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gisors, crawling through a holed stone near, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Givoy agon</foreign>, living fire, made by the friction of wood, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glamorgan, the Vale of, Beltane and Midsummer fires in the, i. 154;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 201, 338</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glands, ashes of Yule log used to cure swollen, i. 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glanvil, Joseph, on a witch in the form of a cat, i. 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glass, the Magician's or Druid's, i. 16</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glatz, precautions against witches on Walpurgis Night in, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glawi, in the Atlas, New Year fires at, i. 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glencuaich, the hawk of, in a Celtic tale, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glenorchy, the Beltane cake in, i. 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Glory, the Hand of,</q> mandragora, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gloucestershire, mistletoe growing on oaks in, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gnabaia, a spirit who swallows and disgorges lads at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Gnid-eld</foreign>, need-fire, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goajiras of Colombia, their seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 34 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goatsucker or fern owl, sex totem of women, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, Aryan, of the thunder and the oak, i. 265</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; on Earth, title of supreme chief of the Bushongo, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Godolphin, in Cornwall, Midsummer fires on, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gold, the flower of chicory to be cut with, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>root of marsh mallow to be dug with, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried, revealed by mistletoe and fern-seed, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; coin, magic plant to be dug up with a, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Golden'>Golden</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Golden'/>
<l>Golden axe, sacred tamarisk touched with, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Golden-Bough'/>
<l>Golden Bough, the, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the priest of Aricia, i. 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a branch of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Virgil's account of the, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>origin of the name, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fish, girl's external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; knife, horse slain in sacrifice with a, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ring, half a hero's strength in a, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sickle, mistletoe cut by Druids with a, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred olive at Olympia cut with a, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>

<lg>
<l>Golden sword and golden arrow, external soul of a hero in a, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goldie, Rev. Hugh, on the <foreign rend='italic'>ukpong</foreign> or external soul in Calabar, ii. <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goliath, effigy of, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Goluan</foreign>, Midsummer, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Good Friday, Judas driven out of church on, i. 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod cut on, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sick children passed through cleft trees on, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goodrich-Freer, A., quoted, i. 154 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Googe, Barnabe, i. 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gooseberry bushes, wild, custom as to, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gorillas, lives of persons bound up with those of, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Görz, belief as to witches at Midsummer about, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grain Coast, West Africa, initiation of girls on the, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grammont, in Belgium, festival of the <q>Crown of Roses</q> at, i. 195;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log at, 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Granada (South America), youthful rulers secluded in, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grand Halleux, bonfires at, i. 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Grannas-mias</foreign>, torches, i. 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Granno, invocation of, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Granno-mio</foreign>, a torch, i. 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grannus, a Celtic deity, identified with Apollo, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grant, the great laird of, not exempt from witchcraft, i. 342 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grass, ceremony to make grass plentiful, i. 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gratz, puppet burned on St. John's Eve at, i. 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grave, dance at initiation in, ii. <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Great Man, who created the world and comes down in the form of lightning, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greece, Midsummer fires in, i. 211 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe in, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greek belief as to menstruous women, i. 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Church, ritual of the new fire at Easter in the, i. 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; stories of girls who were forbidden to see the sun, i. 72 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greeks deemed sacred the places which were struck by lightning, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Green Wolf, Brotherhood of the, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Jumièges in Normandy, i. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greenlanders, their notion that women can conceive by the moon, i. 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregor, Rev. Walter, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on virtue of children born feet foremost, i. 295 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the <q>quarter-ill,</q> 296 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the bewitching of cattle, 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greig, James S., ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greta, river in Yorkshire, i. 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grey, Sir George, on the <foreign rend='italic'>kobong</foreign> or totem, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grimm, J., on need-fire, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 272 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the relation of the Midsummer fires to Balder, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the sanctity of the oak, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the oak and lightning, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grisons, threatening a mist in the, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grizzly Bear clan, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Groot, J. J. M. de, on mugwort in China, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grottkau, precautions against witches in, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ground, sacred persons not allowed to set foot on, i. 2 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to sit on bare, 4, 5, 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girls at puberty not allowed to touch the, 22, 33, 35, 36, 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical plants not to touch the, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe not allowed to touch the, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grouse clan, ii. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grove, Miss Florence, on withered mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grove, Balder's, i. 104, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred grove of Nemi, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul of chief in sacred, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Arician'>Arician</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grubb, Rev. W. B., i. 57 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grün, in Bohemia, mountain arnica gathered at Midsummer at, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guacheta in Colombia, i. 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guaranis of Brazil, their seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guaraunos of the Orinoco, uncleanness of menstruous women among the, i. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guardian angels, afterbirth and navel-string regarded as a man's, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; spirit, afterbirth and seed regarded as, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acquired in a dream, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guatemala, the <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> or external soul among the Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guatusos of Costa Rica, use of bull-roarers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guayquiries of the Orinoco, their beliefs as to menstruous women, i. 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guelphs, the oak of the, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guiana, British, the Macusis of, i. 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordeals undergone by young men among the Indians of, 63 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, French, the Wayanas of, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Guizing</foreign> at Christmas in Lerwick, i. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guleesh and the fairies at Hallowe'en, i. 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gunn, David, kindles need-fire, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guns fired to drive away witches, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gwalior, Holi fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadji Mohammad shoots a were-wolf, i. 312 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>

<lg>
<l>Haida Indians of Queen Charlotte Islands, girls at puberty secluded among the, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hail, bonfires thought to protect fields against, i. 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies to avert, 144, 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires a protection against, 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mountain arnica a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and thunderstorms caused by witches, i. 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hainan, island, i. 137</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hainaut, province of Belgium, fire customs in, i. 108;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>procession of giants in, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hair, unguent for, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prohibition to cut, 28;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of girls at puberty shaved, 31, 56, 57, 59;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hindoo ritual of cutting a child's, 99 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Virgin or St. John looked for in ashes of Midsummer fire, 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 190, 191;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>strength of people bound up with their, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of criminals, witches, and wizards shorn to make them confess, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of children tied to trees, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of novices cut at initiation, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and nails of child buried under a tree, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hairy Stone, the, at Midsummer, i. 212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halberstadt district, need-fire in the, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hall, C. F., among the Esquimaux, i. 13, 134</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;,  Rev. G. R., quoted, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hallowe'en, new fire at, in Ireland, i. 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an old Celtic festival of New Year, 224 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at, 225, 228 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches, hobgoblins, and fairies let loose at, 226 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 245;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches and fairies active on, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Beltane, the two chief fire festivals of the British Celts, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cakes, i. 238, 241, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fires, i. 222 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 230 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Wales, 156</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halmahera, rites of initiation in, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haltwhistle, in Northumberland, burnt sacrifice at, i. 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamilton, Gavin, quoted, i. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hammocks, girls at puberty hung up in, i. 56, 59, 60, 61, 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Hand of Glory,</q> mandragora, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hannibal despoils the shrine on Soracte, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanover, the need-fire in, i. 275;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter bonfires in, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom on St. John's Day about, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hare, pastern bone of a, in a popular remedy, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hares, witches in the form of, i. 157;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches changed into, 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 316 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hares and witches in Yorkshire, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hareskin Tinneh, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harris, Slope of Big Stones in, i. 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hartland, E. S., on the life-token, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haruvarus, degenerate Brahmans, their fire-walk, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harz district, Easter bonfires in the, i. 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in the, 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mountains, Easter fires in the, i. 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in the, 276;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>springwort in the, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hats'/>
<l>Hats, special, worn by girls at puberty, i. 45, 46, 47, 92.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Hoods'>Hoods</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hausa story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawaiians, the New Year of the, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawkweed gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawthorn, mistletoe on, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haxthausen, A. von, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hays of Errol, their fate bound up with an oak-tree and the mistletoe growing on it, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hazebrouch, in France, wicker giants on Shrove Tuesday at, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hazel, the divining-rod made of, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>never struck by lightning, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; rods to drive cattle with, i. 204</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Headache, cure for, i. 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mugwort a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Headdress, special, worn by girls at first menstruation, i. 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Headless Hugh, Highland story of, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; horsemen in India, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heads or faces of menstruous women covered, i. 22, 24, 25, 29, 31, 44 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 55, 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hearne, Samuel, quoted, i. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heart of bewitched animal burnt or boiled to compel the witch to appear, i. 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hearts of diseased cattle cut out and hung up as a remedy, i. 269 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 325</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heaven, the Queen of, ii. <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and earth, between, i. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hector, first chief of Lochbuy, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heiberg, Sigurd K., i. 171 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heifer sacrificed at kindling need-fire, i. 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helensburgh, in Dumbartonshire, Hallowe'en at, i. 237 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Hell-gate of Ireland,</q> i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helmsdale, in Sutherland, need-fire at, i. 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Helpful'/>
<l>Helpful animals in fairy tales, ii. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hemlock branch, external soul of ogress in a, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>

<lg>
<l>Hemlock branches, passing through a ring of, in time of sickness, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; stone in Nottinghamshire, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hemorrhoids, root of orpine a cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hemp, how to make hemp grow tall, i. 109;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaping over the Midsummer bonfire to make the hemp grow tall, 166, 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; seed, divination by, i. 235, 241, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hen and chickens imitated by a woman and her children at Christmas, i. 260</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henderson, William, on need-fire, i. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on a remedy for cattle-disease, 296 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on burnt sacrifice of ox, 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hen's egg, external soul of giant in a, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henshaw, Richard, on external or bush souls in Calabar, ii. <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hephaestus worshipped in Lemnos, i. 138</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herb, a magic, gathered at Hallowe'en, i. 228</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of St. John, mugwort, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herbs thrown across the Midsummer fires, i. 182, 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wonderful, gathered on St. John's Eve or Day, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of St. John, wonderful virtues ascribed to, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and flowers cast into the Midsummer bonfires, i. 162, 163, 172, 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hercules at Argyrus, temple of, i. 99 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herdsmen dread witches and wolves, i. 343</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herefordshire, Midsummer fires in, i. 199;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herndon, W. L., quoted, i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hernia, cure for, i. 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herodias, cursed by Slavonian peasants, i. 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herrera, A. de, on <foreign rend='italic'>naguals</foreign> among the Indians of Honduras, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herrick, Robert, on the Yule log, i. 255</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herring, salt, divination by, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herzegovina, the Yule log in, i. 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hesse, Lenten fire-custom in, i. 118;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter fires in, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wells decked with flowers on Midsummer Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hewitt, J. N. B., on need-fire of the Iroquois, i. 299 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hiaina district of Morocco, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hidatsa Indians, their theory of the plurality of souls, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hieracium pilosella</foreign>, mouse-ear hawk-weed, gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Higgins, Rev. J. C., i. 207 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>High Alps, department of the, Midsummer fires in the, ii. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>High Priest, the Fijian, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Highland story of Headless Hugh, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Highlanders'/>
<l>Highlanders of Scotland, their medicinal applications of menstruous blood, i. 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in the power of witches to destroy cattle, 343 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief concerning snake stones, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Highlands'/>
<l>Highlands of Scotland, snake stones in the, i. 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Beltane fires in the, 146 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at Hallowe'en in the, 229, 234 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire and Beltane fire kindled by the friction of oak in the, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hildesheim, Easter rites of fire and water at, i. 124;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter bonfires at, 141;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the need-fire at, 272 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hawk-weed gathered on Midsummer Day at, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hill of the Fires in the Highlands of Scotland, i. 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Ward, in County Meath, i. 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Himalayan districts, mistletoe in the, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hindoo maidens secluded at puberty, i. 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; marriage custom, i. 75</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ritual, abstinence from salt in, i. 27;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as to cutting a child's hair, 99 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; use of menstruous fluid, i. 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; women, their restrictions at menstruation, i. 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hindoos of Southern India, their Pongol festival, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Punjaub, their custom of passing unlucky children through narrow openings, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hippopotamus, external soul of chief in, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lives of persons bound up with those of hippopotamuses, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hirpi Sorani, their fire-walk, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hlubi chief, his external soul in a pair of ox-horns, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoare, Sir Richard Colt, on Hallowe'en in Wales, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hogg, Alexander, i. 206</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hogmanay, the last day of the year, i. 224, 266</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hohenstaufen Mountains in Wurtemberg, Midsummer fires in the, i. 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hole in tongue of medicine-man, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holed stones which people creep through as a cure, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holes in rocks or stones, sick people passed through, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holi, a festival of Northern India, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holiness or taboo conceived as a dangerous physical substance which needs to be insulated, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>

<lg>
<l>Holland, Easter fires in, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hollantide Eve (Hallowe'en) in the Isle of Man, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hollertau, Bavaria, Easter fires in the, i. 122</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hollis, A. C., ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holly-tree, children passed through a cleft, ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holm-oak, the Golden Bough growing on a, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy Apostles, church of the, at Florence, i. 126</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Land, fire flints brought from the, i. 126</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Holies, the Fijian, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sepulchre, church of the, at Jerusalem, ceremony of the new fire in the, i. 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homesteads protected by bonfires against lightning and conflagration, i. 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homoeopathic or imitative magic, i. 49, 133, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homoeopathy, magical, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homolje mountains in Servia, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honduras, the <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> or external soul among the Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honorific totems of the Carrier Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hoods'/>
<l>Hoods worn by women after childbirth, i. 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by girls at puberty, 44 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 55;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by women at menstruation, 90.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Hats'>Hats</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoop, crawling through a, as a cure or preventive of disease, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of rowan-tree, sheep forced through a, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoopoe brings the mythical springwort, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horatius purified for the murder of his sister, ii. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hornbeam, mistletoe on, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horse, the White, effigy carried through Midsummer fire, i. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witch in the shape of a, 319</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrifice in ancient India, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horse's head thrown into Midsummer fire, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horse-chestnut, mistletoe on, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horses used by sacred persons, i. 4 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be touched or ridden by menstruous women, 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven through the need-fire, 276, 297</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hos, the, of Togoland (West Africa), their dread of menstruous women, i. 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hose, Dr. Charles, on creeping through a cleft stick after a funeral, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and W. McDougall, on the <foreign rend='italic'>ngarong</foreign> or secret helper of the Ibans, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hother, Hodr, or Hod, the blind god, and Balder, i. 101 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hottentots drive their sheep through fire, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>House-communities of the Servians, i. 259 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Houses protected by bonfires against lightning and conflagration, i. 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made fast against witches on Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; of the soul</q> in Isaiah, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Housman, Professor A. E., on the feast of the Nativity of the Virgin, i. 220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Houstry, in Caithness, need-fire at, i. 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Howitt, A. W., on seclusion of menstruous women, i. 78;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on killing a totem animal, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on secrecy of totem names, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the drama of resurrection at initiation, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Howitt, Miss E. B., ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Howth, the western promontory of, Midsummer fire on, i. 204</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Castle, life-tree of the St. Lawrence family at, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huahine, one of the Tahitian islands, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hudson Bay Territory, the Chippeways of, i. 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hughes, Miss E. P., on the fire-walk in Japan, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Human beings burnt in the fires, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; divinities put to death, i. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrifices at fire-festivals, i. 106;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traces of, 146, 148, 150 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 186, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered by the ancient Germans, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Celts of Gaul, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the victims perhaps witches and wizards, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mannhardt's theory, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; victims annually burnt, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hungarian story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hungary, Midsummer fires in, i. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunt, Holman, his picture of the new fire at Jerusalem, i. 130 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunt, Robert, on burnt sacrifices, i. 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunters avoid girls at puberty, i. 44, 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>luck of, spoiled by menstruous women, 87, 89, 90, 91, 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huon Gulf in German New Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hupa Indians of California, seclusion of girls among the, i. 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hurons of Canada, custom of their women at menstruation, i. 88 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Huskanaw</foreign>, initiatory ceremony of the Virginian Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hut burnt at Midsummer, i. 215 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hutchinson, W., quoted, i. 197 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huts, special, for menstruous women, i. 79, 82, 85 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huzuls of the Carpathians kindle new fire at Christmas, i. 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gather simples on St. John's Night, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyaenas, men turned into, i. 313</l>
</lg>

<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hypericum perforatum</foreign>, St. John's wort, gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-St-Johns-Wort'>St. John's Wort</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Hyphear</foreign>, a kind of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyrrockin, a giantess, i. 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibans of Borneo, their <foreign rend='italic'>ngarong</foreign> or secret helper, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibos of the Niger delta, their belief in external human souls lodged in animals, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibrahim Pasha, i. 129</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Icelandic stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Icolmkill, the hill of the fires in, i. 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ideler, L., on the Arab year before Mohammed, i. 217 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Idhlozi</foreign>, ancestral spirit in serpent form, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iglulik, Esquimaux of, i. 134</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ilmenau, witches burnt at, i. 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iluvans of Malabar, marriage custom of, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Image of god carried through fire, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason for carrying over a fire, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Images, colossal, filled with human victims and burnt, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imitative magic, i. 329, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immortality, the burdensome gift of, i. 99 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the soul, experimental demonstration of the, ii. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immortelles, wreaths of, on Midsummer Day, i. 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Implements, magical, not allowed to touch the ground, i. 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Impregnation of women by the sun, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the moon, 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; rite</q> at Hindoo marriages, i. 75</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inauguration of a king in Brahmanic ritual, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inca, fast of the future, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incas of Peru, their ceremony of the new fire, i. 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incantation recited at kindling need-fire, i. 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inconsistency and vagueness of primitive thought, ii. <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>India, seclusion of girls at puberty in, i. 68 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fire-festivals in, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sixty years' cycle in, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the horse-sacrifice in ancient, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torture of suspected witches in, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ancient, traditional cure of skin disease in, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><foreign rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> in, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indian Archipelago, birth-custom in the, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; legend parallel to Balder myth, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indians of Costa Rica, their customs in fasts, i. 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Granada seclude their future rulers, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indians of North America, not allowed to sit on bare ground in war, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls among the, 41 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imitate lightning by torches, 340 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of initiation into religious associations among the, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Index of Superstitions,</q> i. 270</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indra and Apala, in the Rigveda, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and the demon Namuci, Indian legend of, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indrapoora, story of the daughter of a merchant of, ii. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infants tabooed, i. 5, 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ingleborough in Yorkshire, i. 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ingleton, in Yorkshire, need-fire at, i. 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ingniet or Ingiet, a secret society of New Britain, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Initiation, rites in German New Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at puberty, pretence of killing the novice and bringing him to life again during, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Australia, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in New Guinea, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Fiji, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Rook, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in New Britain, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Halmahera, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Fiji apparently intended to introduce the novices to the worshipful spirits of the dead, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Ceram, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Africa, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in North America, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of young men, bull-roarers sounded at the, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of a medicine-man in Australia, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inn, effigies burnt at Midsummer in the valley of the river, i. 172 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innerste, river, i. 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innuits (Esquimaux), i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Insanity, burying in an ant-hill as a cure for, i. 64</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inspired men walk through fire unharmed, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Insulation of women at menstruation, i. 97</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Interpretation of the fire-festivals, i. 328 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inverness-shire, Beltane cakes in, i. 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Invulnerability conferred by a species of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conferred by decoction of a parasitic orchid, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Balder, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attained through blood-brotherhood with animal, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be attained through initiation, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Invulnerable warlock or giant, stories of the, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ipswich witches, i. 304 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iran, marriage custom in, i. 75</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ireland, the Druid's Glass in, i. 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>new fire at Hallowe'en in, 139, 225;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Beltane fires in, 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 201 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fairies at Hallowe'en
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
in, 226 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hallowe'en customs in, 241 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches as hares in, 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure for whooping-cough in, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irish story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iron not to be used in digging fern root, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe gathered without the use of, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be used in cutting certain plants, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom observed by the Toradjas at the working of, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iron-wort, bunches of, held in the smoke of the Midsummer fires, i. 179</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iroquois, ceremony of the new fire among the, i. 133 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire among the, 299 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaiah, <q>houses of the soul</q> in, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isfendiyar and Rustem, i. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 314</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Island, need-fire kindled in an, i. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isle de France, Midsummer giant burnt in, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Isle-Man'/>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Man, Beltane fires in the, i. 157.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Man-Isle'>Man, Isle of</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Istria, the Croats of, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italian stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ancient practice of passing conquered enemies under a yoke, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italians, the oak the chief sacred tree among the ancient, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italy, birth-trees in, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe in, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Itongo</foreign>, plural <foreign rend='italic'>amatongo</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ivory Coast, totemism among the Siena of the, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ivy to dream on, i. 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Ixia</foreign>, a kind of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jablanica, need-fire at, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jack-in-the-Green, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jaffa, new Easter fire carried to, i. 130 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jakkaneri, in the Neilgherry Hills, the fire-walk at, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James, M. R., on the Sibyl's Wish, i. 100 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James and Philip, the Apostles, feast of, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jamieson, J., on the <q>quarter-ill,</q> i. 296 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>January, the Holi festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fire-walk in, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the sixth, the nativity of Christ on, i. 246</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Janus and Jupiter, ii. <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Japan, the Ainos of, i. 20, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fire-walk in, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Japanese ceremony of new fire, i. 137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Java, birth-trees in, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jebel Bela mountain, in the Sudan, i. 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, ceremony of the new fire, at Easter in, i. 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeugny, the forest of, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jevons, Dr. F. B., on the Roman <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>genius</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jewitt, John R., on ritual of mimic death among the Nootka Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Johanniswurzel</foreign>, the male fern, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnstone, Rev. A., quoted, i. 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Jônee</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>joanne</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>jouanne</foreign>, the Midsummer fire (the fire of St. John), i. 189</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joyce, P. W., on driving cattle through fires, i. 159 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the bisection of the Celtic year, 223 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judas, effigies of, burnt in Easter fires, i. 121, 127 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 130 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 143, 146, ii. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven out of church on Good Friday, i. 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; candle, i. 122 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fire at Easter, i. 123, 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julian calendar used by Mohammedans, i. 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>July, procession of giants at Douay in, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the twenty-fifth, St. James's Day, flower of chicory cut on, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jumièges, in Normandy, Brotherhood of the Green Wolf at, i. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jumping over a wife, significance of, i. 23</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>June, the fifteenth of, St. Vitus's Day, i. 335</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the fire-walk in, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juniper burnt in need-fire, i. 288;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to fumigate byres, 296</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juno and Diana, ii. <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jupiter represented by an oak-tree on the Capitol, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps personified by the King of the Wood, the priest of Diana at Nemi, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Jupiter and Janus, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, cycle of sixty years based on the sidereal revolution of the planet, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jura, fire-custom at Lent in the, i. 114</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mountains, Midsummer bonfires in the, i. 188 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in the, 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jurby, parish of, in the Isle of Man, i. 305</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jutland, sick children and cattle passed through holes in turf in, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitions about a parasitic rowan in, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ka</foreign>, external soul or double in ancient Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kabadi, a district of British New Guinea, i. 35</l>
</lg>

<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>

<lg>
<l>Kabenau river, in German New Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kabyle tale, milk-tie in a, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in a, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kahma, in Burma, annual extinction of fires in, i. 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kai of New Guinea, their seclusion of women at menstruation, i. 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their use of a cleft stick as a cure, ii. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their rites of initiation, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Kail'/>
<l>Kail, divination by stolen, i. 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kakian association in Ceram, rites of initiation in the, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kalmuck story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamenagora in Croatia, Midsummer fires at, i. 178</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamtchatkans, their purification after a death, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kanna district, Northern Nigeria, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kappiliyans of Madura, their seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karens of Burma, their custom at childbirth, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kasai River, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Katajalina, a spirit who eats up boys at initiation and restores them to life, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Katrine, Loch, i. 231</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kauffmann, Professor F., i. 102 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 103 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaupole, a Midsummer pole in Eastern Prussia, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kawars, of India, their cure for fever, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaya-Kaya or Tugeri of Dutch New Guinea, their use of bull-roarers, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kayans or Bahaus of Central Borneo, i. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom observed by them after a funeral, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their way of giving the slip to a demon, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keating, Geoffrey, Irish historian, quoted, i. 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Beltane fires, 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keating, W. H., quoted, i. 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kei Islands, birth-custom in the, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keitele, Lake, in Finland, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kemble, J. M., on need-fire, i. 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kerry, Midsummer fires in, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kersavondblok</foreign>, the Yule log, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kersmismot</foreign>, the Yule log, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khambu caste in Sikkhim, their custom after a funeral, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kharwars of Mirzapur, their dread of menstruous women, i. 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khasis of Assam, story of the external soul told by the, i. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khnumu, Egyptian god, fashions a wife for Bata, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khonds, human sacrifices among the, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kia blacks of Queensland, their treatment of girls at puberty, i. 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kidd, Dudley, on external souls of chiefs, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kildare, Midsummer fires in, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kilkenny, Midsummer fires in, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Killin, the hill of the fires at, i. 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Killing a totem animal, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the novice and bringing him to life again at initiation, pretence of, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King, nominal, chosen at Midsummer, i. 194, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presides at summer bonfire, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Queen of Roses, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Bean, i. 153 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Summer chosen on St. Peter's Day, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Wood at Nemi put to death, i. 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Arician grove a personification of an oak-spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the priest of Diana at Aricia, perhaps personified Jupiter, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Kings'>Kings</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kingaru, clan of the Wadoe, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Kings'/>
<l>Kings, sacred or divine, put to death, i. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subject to taboos, 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and priests, their sanctity analogous to the uncleanness of women at menstruation, i. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Uganda, their life bound up with barkcloth trees, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kings, The Epic of</hi>, i. 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kingsley, Miss Mary H., on external or bush souls, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on rites of initiation in West Africa, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kingussie, in Inverness-shire, Beltane cakes at, i. 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kinship created by the milk-tie, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kirchmeyer, Thomas, author of <hi rend='italic'>Regnum Papisticum</hi>, i. 124, 125 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his account of Midsummer customs, 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kirghiz story of girl who might not see the sun, i. 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kirk Andreas, in the Isle of Man, i. 306</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kirkmichael, in Perthshire, Beltane fires and cakes at, i. 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kirton Lindsey, in Lincolnshire, i. 318;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>medical use of mistletoe at, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kitching, Rev. A. L., on cure for lightning stroke, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kiwai, island off New Guinea, use of bull-roarers in, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kiziba, to the west of Victoria Nyanza, theory of the afterbirth in, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kloo, in the Queen Charlotte Islands, i. 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knawel, St. John's blood on root of, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>

<lg>
<l>Knife, divination by, i. 241;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul of child bound up with, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Darding Knife,</q> honorific totem of the Carrier Indians, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kobong</foreign>, totem, in Western Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Köhler, Joh., lights need-fire and burnt as a witch, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Köhler, Reinhold, on the external soul in folk-tales, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kolelo, in East Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Konz on the Moselle, custom of rolling a burning wheel down hill at, i. 118, 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 337 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kooboos of Sumatra, their theory of the afterbirth and navel-string, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koppenwal, church of St. Corona at, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koran, passage of, used as a charm, i. 18</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koryaks, their festivals of the dead and subsequent purification, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom in time of pestilence, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koshchei the Deathless, Russian story of, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koskimo Indians of British Columbia, use of bull-roarers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kreemer, J., on the Looboos of Sumatra, ii. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kroeber, A. L., quoted, i. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kruijt, A. C., on Toradja custom as to the working of iron, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kuga</foreign>, an evil spirit, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kuhn, Adalbert, on need-fire, i. 273;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Midsummer fire, 335;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the divining-rod, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kühnau, R., on precautions against witches in Silesia, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kukunjevac, in Slavonia, need-fire at, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kulin nation of South-Eastern Australia, sex totems in the, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tribe of Victoria, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kumaon, in North-West India, the Holi festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kupalo, image of, burnt or thrown into stream on St. John's Night, i. 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigy of, carried across fire and thrown into water, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kupalo's Night, Midsummer Eve, i. 175, 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kurnai, a tribe of Gippsland, sex totems and fights concerning them among the, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Küstendil, in Bulgaria, need-fire at, i. 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kwakiutl, Indians of British Columbia, their story of an ogress whose life was in a hemlock branch, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pass through a hemlock ring in time of epidemic, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kylenagranagh, the hill of, in Ireland, i. 324</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>La Manche, in Normandy, Lenten fire-custom in, i. 115</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>La Paz, in Bolivia, Midsummer fires at, i. 213;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer flowers at, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lacaune, belief as to mistletoe at, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lachlan River, in Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lachlins of Rum and deer, superstition concerning, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ladyday, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lahn, the Yule log in the valley of the, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamb burnt alive to save the rest of the flock, i. 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lammas, the first of August, superstitious practice at, i. 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Lamoa</foreign>, gods in Poso, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lancashire, Hallowe'en customs in, i. 244 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Landak, district of Dutch Borneo, i. 5, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lanercost, Chronicle of, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lang, Andrew, on the fire-walk, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the bull-roarer, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Language of animals learned by means of fern-seed, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>L'ánṣăra</foreign> (<foreign rend='italic'>El Anṣarah</foreign>), Midsummer Day in North Africa, i. 213, 214 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lanyon, in Cornwall, holed stone near, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laon, Midsummer fires near, i. 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laos, custom of elephant hunters in, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the natives of, their doctrine of the plurality of souls, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lapps, their rule as to menstruous women, i. 91;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom of shooting arrows at skin of dead bear, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Larkspur, looking at Midsummer bonfires through bunches of, i. 163, 165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Larrakeeyah tribe of South Australia, their treatment of girls at puberty, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laurus and Florus, feast of, on August 18th, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lausitz, Midsummer fires in, i. 170;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage oaks in, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lawgivers, ancient, on the uncleanness of women at menstruation, i. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lead, melted, divination by, i. 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaf-clad mummer on Midsummer Day, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaping over bonfires to ensure good crops, i. 107;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a preventive of colic, 107, 195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to make the flax grow tall, 119, 165, 166, 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 168, 173, 174, 337;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to ensure a happy marriage, 107, 108;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to ensure a plentiful harvest, 155, 156;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to be free from backache at reaping, 165, 168;</l>
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a preventive of fever, 166, 173, 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for luck, 171, 189;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in order to be free from ague, 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in order to marry and have many children, 204, 338 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as cure of sickness, 214;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to procure offspring, 214, 338;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>over ashes of fire as remedy for skin diseases, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>after a burial to escape the ghost, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a panacea for almost all ills, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a protection against witchcraft, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaping of women over the Midsummer bonfires to ensure an easy delivery, i. 194, 339</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaps of lovers over the Midsummer bonfires, i. 165, 166, 168, 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leather, Mrs. Ella Mary, on the Yule log, i. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lebanon, peasants of the, their dread of menstruous women, i. 83 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lech, Midsummer fires in the valley of the, i. 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lechrain, the divining rod in, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lecky, W. E. H., on the treatment of magic and witchcraft by the Christian Church, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lee, the laird of, his <q>cureing stane,</q> i. 325</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Leeting</foreign> the witches, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legends of persons who could not die, i. 99 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legs and thighs of diseased cattle cut off and hung up as a remedy, i. 296 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 325</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leine, river, i. 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leinster, Midsummer fires in, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leitrim, Midsummer fires in County, i. 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at Hallowe'en in, 242;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 297;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witch as hare in, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lemnos, worship of Hephaestus in, i. 138</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lemon, external souls of ogres in a, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lengua Indians of the Paraguayan Chaco, i. 75 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls at puberty among the, 56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>masquerade of boys among, 57 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lent, the first Sunday in, fire-festival on, i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bonfires on, 107 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lenten fires, i. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lenz, H. O., on ancient names for mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leobschütz, in Silesia, Midsummer fires at, i. 170</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leonard, Major A. G., on souls of people in animals, ii. <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leopard the commonest familiar of Fan wizards, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leopards, lives of persons bound up with those of, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external human souls in, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lerwick, Christmas <hi rend='italic'>guizing</hi> at, i. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>procession with lighted tar-barrels on Christmas Eve at, 268;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>celebration of Up-helly-a' at, 269 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lesachthal (Carinthia), new fire at Easter in the, i. 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lesbos, fires on St. John's Eve in, i. 211 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leslie, David, on Caffre belief as to spirits of the dead incarnate in serpents, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>L'Étoile, Lenten fires at, i. 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lettermore Island, Midsummer fires in, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Letts of Russia, Midsummer fires among the, i. 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gather aromatic plants on Midsummer Day, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lewis, Professor W. J., i. 127 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lewis, island of, custom of fiery circle in the, i. 151 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in the, 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lexicon Mythologicum</hi>, author of, on the Golden Bough, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lhwyd, Edward, on snake stones, i. 16 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>License, annual period of, i. 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Midsummer festival, 180, 339</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liège, Lenten fires near, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lierre, in Belgium, the witches' Sabbath at, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Life of community bound up with life of divine king, i. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the water of, ii. <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of woman bound up with ornament, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of a man bound up with the capital of a column, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of a man bound up with fire in hut, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of child bound up with knife, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of children bound up with trees, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divisibility of, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Soul'>Soul</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -indices, trees and plants as, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tokens in fairy tales, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tree of the Manchu dynasty at Peking, ii. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees of kings of Uganda, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ligho, a heathen deity of the Letts, i. 177, 178 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Light, girls at puberty not allowed to see the, i. 57;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul of witch in a, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Lightning'/>
<l>Lightning, charred sticks of Easter fire used as a talisman against, i. 121, 124, 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 145, 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Easter candle a talisman against, 122;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brands of the Midsummer bonfires a protection against, 166 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>flowers thrown on roofs at Midsummer as a protection against, 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charred sticks of bonfires a protection against, 174, 187, 188, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ashes of Midsummer fires a protection against, 187, 188, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torches interpreted as imitations
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
of, 340 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bonfires a protection against, 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a magical coal a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pine-tree struck by, used to make bull-roarer, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitions about trees struck by, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be caused by a great bird, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>strikes oaks oftener than any other tree of the European forests, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as a god descending out of heaven, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mode of treating persons who have been struck by, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>places struck by lightning enclosed and deemed sacred, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Thunder'>Thunder</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lightning and thunder, the Yule log a protection against, i. 248, 249, 250, 252, 253, 254, 258, 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mountain arnica a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lillooet Indians of British Columbia, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Limburg, processions, with torches in, i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lime-kiln in divination, i. 235, 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tree, the bloom of the, gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe on limes, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wood used to kindle need-fire, i. 281, 283, 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lincolnshire, the Yule log in, i. 257;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches as cats and hares in, 318;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>calf buried to stop a murrain in, 326;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe a remedy for epilepsy and St. Vitus's dance in, ii. 83 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lindenbrog, on need-fire, i. 335 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lint seed, divination by, i. 235</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liongo, an African Samson, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lion, the sun in the sign of the, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lismore, witch as hare in, i. 316 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lithuania, Midsummer fires in, i. 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sanctuary at Romove in, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lithuanians, their custom before first ploughing in spring, i. 18;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of the oak, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their story of the external soul, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lives of a family bound up with a fish, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with a cat, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Living fire made by friction of wood, i. 220;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the need-fire, 281, 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Livonia, story of a were-wolf in, i. 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Livonians cull simples on Midsummer Day, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lizard, external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sex totem in the Port Lincoln tribe of South Australia, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to have divided the sexes in the human species, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loaf thrown into river Neckar on St. John's Day, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loango, rule as to infants in, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girls secluded at puberty in, 22</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loch Katrine, i. 231</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Tay, i. 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lock and key in a charm, i. 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Locks opened by springwort, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and by the white flower of chicory, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe a master-key to open all, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Locust, a Batta totem, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Log, the Yule, i. 247 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Logierait, in Perthshire, Beltane festival in, i. 152 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hallowe'en fires in, 231 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loiret, Lenten fires in the department of, i. 114</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loki and Balder, i. 101 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lokoja on the Niger, ii. <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lombardy, belief as to the <q>oil of St. John</q> on St. John's Morning in, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>London, the immortal girl of, i. 99;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Longridge Fell, <foreign rend='italic'>leeting</foreign> the witches at, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Looboos of Sumatra creep through a cleft rattan to escape a demon, ii. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Looking at bonfires through mugwort a protection against headache and sore eyes, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus europaeus</foreign>, a species of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called <q>oak mistletoe</q> (<foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>visco quercino</foreign>) in Italy, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <foreign rend='italic'>vestitus</foreign>, in India, ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lord of the Wells at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lorne, the Beltane cake in, i. 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lorraine, Midsummer fires in, i. 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 253;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer customs in, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loudoun, in Ayrshire, i. 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louis XIV. at Midsummer bonfire in Paris, ii. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Love-charm of arrows, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lovers leap over the Midsummer bonfires, i. 165, 166, 168, 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Low Countries, the Yule log in the, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lowell, Percival, his fire-walk, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lübeck, church of St. Mary at, i. 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucerne, Lenten fire-custom in the canton of, i. 118 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luchon, in the Pyrenees, serpents burnt alive at the Midsummer festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucian, on the Platonic doctrine of the soul, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luck, leaping over the Midsummer fires for good, i. 171, 189</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luckiness of the right hand, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lunar calendar of Mohammedans, i. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>

<lg>
<l>Lungs or liver of bewitched animal burnt or boiled to compel the witch to appear, i. 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lushais of Assam, sick children passed through a coil among the, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lussac, in Poitou, Midsummer fires at, i. 191</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luther, Martin, burnt in effigy at Midsummer, i. 167, 172 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luxemburg, <q>Burning the Witch</q> in, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Lythrum salicaria</foreign>, purple loosestrife, gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mabuiag, seclusion of girls at puberty in, i. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread and seclusion of women at menstruation in, 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girls at puberty in, 92 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief as to a species of mistletoe in, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mac Crauford, the great arch witch, i. 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macassar in Celebes, magical unguent in, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macdonald, Rev. James, on the story of Headless Hugh, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on external soul in South Africa, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macdonell, A. A., on Agni, ii. <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McDougall, W., and C. Hose, on creeping through a cleft stick after a funeral, ii. <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macedonia, Midsummer fires among the Greeks of, i. 212;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bonfires on August 1st in, 220;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire among the Serbs of Western, 281;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's flower at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macedonian peasantry burn effigies of Judas at Easter, i. 131</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McGregor, A. W., on the rite of new birth among the Akikuyu, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mackay, Alexander, on need-fire, i. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mackays, sept of the <q>descendants of the seal,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mackenzie, E., on need-fire, i. 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mackenzie, Sheriff David J., i. 268 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macphail, John, on need-fire, i. 293 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macusis of British Guiana, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 60</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madangs of Borneo, custom observed by them after a funeral, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madern, parish of, Cornwall, holed stone in, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madonie Mountains, in Sicily, Midsummer fires on the, i. 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madras Presidency, the fire-walk in the, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madura, the Kappiliyans of, i. 69;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Parivarams of, 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maeseyck, processions with torches at, i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magic, homoeopathic or imitative, i. 49, 133, 329, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dwindles into divination, i. 336;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>movement of thought from magic through religion to science, ii. <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magic and ghosts, mugwort a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and science, different views of natural order postulated by the two, ii. <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; flowers of Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magical bone in sorcery, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; implements not allowed to touch the ground, i. 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; influence of medicine-bag, ii. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; virtues of plants at Midsummer apparently derived from the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magician's apprentice, Danish story of the, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Glass, the, i. 16</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magyars, Midsummer fires among the, i. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stories of the external soul among the, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Mahabharata</hi>, Draupadi and her five husbands in the, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Maiden-flax</q> at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maidu Indians of California, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 42;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their notion as to fire in trees, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their idea of lightning, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maimonides, on the seclusion of menstruous women, i. 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Makalanga, a Bantu tribe, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Makral</foreign>, <q>the witch,</q> i. 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malabar, the Iluvans of, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Tiyans of, 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malassi, a fetish in West Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malay belief as to sympathetic relation between man and animal, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malayo-Siamese families of the Patani States, their custom as to the afterbirth, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malays of the Peninsula, their doctrine of the plurality of souls, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Male and female souls in Chinese philosophy, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malkin Tower, witches at the, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malta, fires on St. John's Eve in, i. 210 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Malurus cyaneus</foreign>, superb warbler, women's <q>sister,</q> among the Kurnai, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man and animal, sympathetic relation between, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Man-Isle'/>
<l>Man, the Isle of, Midsummer fires in, i. 201, 337;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>old New Year's Day in, 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hallowe'en customs in, 243 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bonfires on St. Thomas's Day in, 266;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cattle burnt alive to stop a murrain in, 325 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mugwort gathered on Midsummer Eve in, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Isle-Man'>Isle of Man</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>

<lg>
<l>Manchu dynasty, the life-tree of the, ii. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandragora, <q>the hand of glory,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mang'anje woman, her external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mango tree, festival of wild, i. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony for the fertilization of the, 10</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Manitoo</foreign>, personal totem, ii. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mannhardt, W., on fire-customs, i. 106 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on burning leaf-clad representative of spirit of vegetation, 25;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his theory that the fires of the fire-festivals are charms to secure sunshine, 329, 331 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on torches as imitations of lightning, 340 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Hirpi Sorani, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the human victims sacrificed by the Celts, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his theory of the Druidical sacrifices, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his solar theory of the bonfires at the European fire-festivals, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on killing a cock on the harvest-field, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mantis religiosus</foreign>, a totem, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manu, Hindoo lawgiver, on the uncleanness of women at menstruation, i. 95;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Laws of, on the three births of the Aryan, ii. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manx mummers at Hallowe'en, i. 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maoris, birth-trees among the, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mara tribe of Northern Australia, initiation of medicine-men in the, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Marake</foreign>, an ordeal of being stung by ants and wasps, i. 63 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcellus of Bordeaux, his medical treatise, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>March, the month of, the fire-walk in, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe cut at the full moon of, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; moon, woodbine cut in the increase of the, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Margas</foreign>, exogamous totemic clans of the Battas of Sumatra, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marilaun, A. Kerner von, on mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marjoram burnt at Midsummer, i. 214;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a talisman against witchcraft, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mark of Brandenburg, need-fire in the, i. 273;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>simples culled at Midsummer in the, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's blood in the, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod in the, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marotse. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Barotse'>Barotse</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marquesas Islands, the fire-walk in the, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage, leaping over bonfires to ensure a happy, i. 107, 108, 110;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omens of, drawn from Midsummer bonfires, 168, 174, 178, 185, 189;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omens of, drawn from bonfires, 338 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omens of, from flowers, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak-trees planted at, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Married, the person last, lights the bonfire, i. 107, 109, 111, 119, 339;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>young man last married provides wheel to be burnt, 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the person last married officiates at Midsummer fire, 192;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>men married within the year collect fuel for Midsummer fire, 192 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>married men kindle need-fire, 289;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>last married bride made to leap over bonfire, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mars and Silvia, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marsaba, a devil who swallows lads at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marseilles, drenching people with water at Midsummer in, i. 193;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer king of the double-axe at, 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log at, 250;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer flowers at, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marshall Islands, belief in the external soul in the, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marsi, the ancient, i. 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martin of Urzedow, i. 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martin, M., on <foreign rend='italic'>dessil</foreign> (<foreign rend='italic'>deiseal</foreign>), i. 151 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on need-fire, 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marwaris, of India, Holi festival among the, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marxberg, the, on the Moselle, i. 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masai, peace-making ceremony among the, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mask, not to wear a, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masked dances, bull-roarers used at, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masks worn by girls at puberty, i. 31, 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn at Duk-duk ceremonies in New Britain, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by members of a secret society, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masquerade of boys among the Lengua Indians, i. 57 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masuren, a district of Eastern Prussia, Midsummer fire kindled by the revolution of a wheel at, i. 177, 335 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by flowers on Midsummer Eve in, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by orpine at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>camomile gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fire kindled by friction of oak at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matabeles fumigate their gardens, i. 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matacos, Indian tribe of the Gran Chaco, their custom of secluding girls at puberty, i. 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mataguayos, Indian tribe of the Gran Chaco, their custom of secluding girls at puberty, i. 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matthes, B. F., on sympathetic relation between man and animal, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mauhes, Indians of Brazil, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 59;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordeal of young men among the, 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maundy Thursday, i. 125 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maurer, Konrad, on Icelandic story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May Day in the Isle of Man, i. 157;</l>
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sheep burnt as a sacrifice on, 306;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches active on, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Eve of, Snake Stones thought to be formed on, i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a witching time, 295;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches active on, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May-tree carried about, i. 120, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mayo, County, story of Guleesh in, i. 228</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>M'Bengas of the Gaboon, birth-trees among the, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mbengga, in Fiji, the fire-walk in, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meakin, Budgett, on Midsummer fires in Morocco, i. 214 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meath, County, Hill of Ward in, i. 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Uisnech in, 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meaux, Midsummer bonfires in the diocese of, i. 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mecklenburg, need-fire in, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>simples gathered at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mugwort at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod in, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treatment of the afterbirth in, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through a cleft oak as a cure in, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of striking blindfold at a half-buried cock in, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medicine-bag, instrument of pretended death and resurrection at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -man in Australia, initiation of, ii. <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Megara besieged by Minos, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meinersen, in Hanover, i. 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meissen or Thuringia, horse's head thrown into Midsummer fire in, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melanesian conception of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Papuan stocks in New Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meleager and the firebrand, story of, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the olive-leaf, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melur, in the Neilgherry Hills, the fire-walk at, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Men disguised as women, i. 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and women eat apart, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Mên-an-tol</foreign>, <q>holed stone</q> in Cornwall, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menomini Indians, ritual of death and resurrection among the, ii. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menstruation, seclusion of girls at the first, i. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the first, attributed to defloration by a spirit, 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reasons for secluding women at, 97</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menstruous blood, the dread of, i. 76.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Blood'>Blood</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; energy, beneficent applications of, i. 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fluid, medicinal applications of the, i. 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Menstruous'/>
<l>Menstruous women keep their heads or faces covered, i. 22, 24, 25, 29, 31, 44 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 55, 90, 92;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to cross or bathe in rivers, 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to go near water, 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to spoil fisheries, 77, 78, 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>painted red, or red and white, 78;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to use the ordinary paths, 78, 80, 84, 89, 90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to approach the sea, 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to enter cultivated fields, 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>obliged to occupy special huts, 79, 82, 85 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to spoil crops, 79, 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to cook, 80, 82, 84, 90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to drink milk, 80, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to handle salt, 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept from wells, 81, 82, 97;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>obliged to use separate doors, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to lie on high beds, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to touch or see fire, 84, 85;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to cross the tracks of animals, 84, 91, 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excluded from religious ceremonies, 85;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to eat with men, 85, 90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to spoil the luck of hunters, 87, 89, 90, 91, 94;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to ride horses, 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to walk on ice of rivers and lakes, 90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dangers to which they are thought to be exposed, 94;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to touch beer, wine or vinegar, 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to salt or pickle meat, 96 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to cross running streams, 97;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to draw water at wells, 97;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to protect fields against insects, 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dreaded and secluded in Australia, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Torres Straits Islands, 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in New Guinea, 79,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Galela, 79,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Sumatra, 79,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Africa, 79 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Jews and in Syria, 83 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in India, 84 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Annam, 85,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in America, 85 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mequinez, Midsummer custom at, i. 216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merolla, J., on seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 31 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merrakech, in Morocco, Midsummer custom at, i. 216;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>New Year fires at, 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mesopotamia, Atrae in, i. 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mespelaer, St. Peter's fires at, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Messaria, in Cythnos, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metz, F., on the fire-walk, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metz, cats burnt alive in Midsummer fire at, ii. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mexican ceremony of new fire, i. 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; representation of the sun as a wheel, i. 334 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mexico, effigies of Judas burnt at Easter in, i. 127 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Zapotecs of, ii. 212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael, in the Isle of Man, i. 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michaelmas, cakes baked at, i. 149.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-St-Michael'>St. Michael</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michemis, a Tibetan tribe, a funeral ceremony among the, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Middle Ages, the Yule log in the, i. 252;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the need-fire in the, 270</l>
</lg>

<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Midsummer'/>
<l>Midsummer, wells crowned with flowers at, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing at, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred to Balder, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-St-John'>St. John's Day</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bonfire called <q>fire of heaven,</q> i. 334;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intended to drive away dragons, 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; Brooms</q> in Sweden, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day, charm for fig-trees on, i. 18;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>water claims human victims on, 26 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Rome, 178;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as unlucky, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve, Snake Stones thought to be formed on, i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Trolls and evil spirits abroad on, 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches active on, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the season for gathering wonderful herbs and flowers, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the magic flowers of, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination on, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dreams of love on, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fernseed blooms at, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod cut at, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>activity of witches and warlocks on, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treasures bloom in the earth on, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the oak thought to bloom on, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival common to peoples on both sides of the Mediterranean, i. 219, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the most important of the year among the primitive Aryans of Europe, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to Druidism, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Midsummer-Fires'/>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fires, i. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Wales, 156</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; flowers and plants used as talismans against witchcraft, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Men, orpine, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; mummers clad in green fir branches, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Midwinter fires, i. 246 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mijatovich, Chedo, on the <foreign rend='italic'>Zadrooga</foreign> or Servian house-community, i. 259 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mikado not allowed to set foot on ground, i. 2 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sun not allowed to shine on him, 18 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milk, girls at puberty forbidden to drink, i. 22, 30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>libations of, 30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be drunk by menstruous women, 80, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stolen by witches from cows, 176, 343, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omens drawn from boiling, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>libations of, poured on fire, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>libations of, poured into a stream, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>poured on sick cattle, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and butter thought to be improved by the Midsummer fires, i. 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stolen by witches at Midsummer, 185;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witchcraft fatal to, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tie as a bond of kinship, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -vessels not to be touched by menstruous women, i. 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milking cows through a hole in a branch or a <q>witch's nest,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Millaeus on judicial torture, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miller's wife a witch, story of the, i. 319 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miming, a satyr of the woods, i. 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minahassa, in Celebes, ceremony at a house-warming in, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minangkabauers of Sumatra, their belief as to menstruous women, i. 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minos, king of Crete, besieges Megara, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mint, flowers of, gathered on St. John's Day, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mirzapur, the Bhuiyars of, i. 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Misfortune burnt in Midsummer fires, i. 215;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>got rid of by leaping over Midsummer fires, 215</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missel-thrush and mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Mist-healing,</q> Swiss expression for kindling a need-fire, i. 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mistletoe, the divining-rod made of, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped by the Druids, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cut on the sixth day of the moon, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>makes barren animals and women to bring forth, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cut with a golden sickle, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to have fallen from the sky, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called the <q>all-healer,</q> <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an antidote to all poison, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered on the first day of the moon, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to touch the earth, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a cure for epilepsy, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extinguishes fire, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>venerated by the Ainos of Japan, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>growing on willow specially efficacious, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>confers invulnerability, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its position as a parasite on a tree the source of superstitions about it, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be cut but shot or knocked down with stones, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the folk-lore of modern European peasants, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>medical virtues ascribed to, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>these virtues a pure superstition, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cut when the sun is in Sagittarius, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>growing on oak a panacea for green wounds, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mystic qualities ascribed to mistletoe at Midsummer (St. John's Day or Eve), <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cut at the full moon of March, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called <q>thunder-besom</q> in Aargau, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a masterkey to open all locks, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against witchcraft, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>given to first cow that calves after New Year, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered especially at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grows on oaks in Sweden, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ancient Italian belief that mistletoe could be destroyed neither by fire nor water, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Balder's life or death in the, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life of oak in, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to touch the ground, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against witchcraft and Trolls, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against fairy changelings, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hung over doors of stables and byres
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
in Brittany, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>; thought to disclose
treasures in the earth, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered at the solstices, Midsummer and Christmas, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traditional privilege of, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>growing on a hazel, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>growing on a thorn, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life of the oak conceived to be in the, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps conceived as a germ or seed of fire, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sanctity of mistletoe perhaps explained by the belief that the plant has fallen on the tree in a flash of lightning, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two species of, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum album</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus europaeus</foreign>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found most commonly on apple-trees, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, compare <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>growing on oaks in England, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seeds of, deposited by missel-thrush, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ancient names of, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Virgil on, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dutch names for, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mistletoe and Balder, i. 101 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and the Golden Bough, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mitchell, Sir Arthur, on a barbarous cure for murrain, i. 326</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mithr, Armenian fire-god, i. 131 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mithraic mysteries, initiation into the, ii. <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Mizimu</foreign>, spirits of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mlanje, in British Central Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mnasara tribe of Morocco, i. 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mogk, Professor Eugen, i. 330</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammedan calendar lunar, i. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; New Year festival in North Africa, i. 217 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; peoples of North Africa, Midsummer fires among the, i. 213 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moharram, first Mohammedan month, i. 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moles and field-mice driven away by torches, i. 115, ii. <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molsheim in Baden, i. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mondays, witches dreaded on, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mongolian story, milk-tie in a, i. 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monster supposed to swallow and disgorge novices at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mont des Fourches, in the Vosges, i. 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montaigne on ceremonial extinction of fires, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montanus, on the Yule log, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montenegro, the Yule log in, i. 263</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montezuma not allowed to set foot on ground, i. 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montols of Northern Nigeria, their belief in their sympathetic relation to snakes, ii. <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moon, impregnation of women by the, i. 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sixth day of the, mistletoe cut on, 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the first day of the, mistletoe gathered on, 78;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the full, transformation of were-wolves at, 314 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mooney, James, on Cherokee ideas as to trees struck by lightning, ii. <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moore, <hi rend='italic'>Manx Surnames,</hi> quoted by Sir John Rhys, i. 306</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moors, their superstition as to the <q>sultan of the oleander,</q> i. 18</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moosheim, in Wurtemberg, leaf-clad mummer at, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moravia, fires to burn the witches in, i. 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 175;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod in, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moravians cull simples at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moray, remedy for a murrain in the county of, i. 326</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morayshire, medical use of mistletoe in, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morbihan in Brittany, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moresin, Thomas, on St. Peter's fires in Scotland, i. 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morice, Father A. G., on customs and beliefs of the Carrier Indians as to menstruous women, i. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the honorific totems of the Carrier Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morlaks, the Yule log among the, i. 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morlanwelz, bonfires at, i. 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morning star, the rising of the, i. 40, 133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morocco, magical virtue ascribed to rain-water in, i. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 213 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>water thought to acquire marvellous virtue at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical plants gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morven, i. 290;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consumptive people passed through rifted rocks in, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moscow, annual new fire in villages near, i. 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moselle, bonfires on the, i. 109;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Konz on the, 118, 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moses on the uncleanness of women at menstruation, i. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mosquito territory, Central America, seclusion of menstruous women in the, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mota, in the New Hebrides, conception of the external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Motherwort, garlands of, at Midsummer, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moulin, parish of, in Perthshire, Hallowe'en fires in, i. 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moulton, Professor J. H., on the etymology of Soranus, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mountain arnica gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against thunder, lightning, hail, and conflagration, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>

<lg>
<l>Mountain-ash, parasitic, used to make the divining rod, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe on, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Rowan'>Rowan</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; scaur, external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mourne Mountains, i. 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mourners tabooed, i. 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>step over fire after funeral in China, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purified by fire, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs observed by, among the Bella Coola Indians, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mourning, the great, for Isfendiyar, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mouse-ear hawkweed (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hieracium pilosella</foreign>) gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Movement of thought from magic through religion to science, ii. <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mugwort (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Artemisia vulgaris</foreign>), wreaths of, at Midsummer, i. 163, 165, 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a preventive of sore eyes, 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a preservative against witchcraft, 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against thunder, ghosts, magic, and witchcraft, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered on Midsummer Day or Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thrown into the Midsummer fires, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in exorcism, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mull, the need-fire in, i. 148, 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Beltane cake in, 149;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>remedy for cattle-disease in, 325;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consumptive people passed through rifted rocks in, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mullein, sprigs of, passed across Midsummer fires protect cattle against sickness and sorcery, i. 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bunches of, passed across Midsummer fires and fastened on cattle-shed, 191;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>yellow (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Verbascum</foreign>), gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>yellow hoary (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Verbascum pulverulentum</foreign>), its golden pyramid of blooms, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>great (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Verbascum thapsus</foreign>), called King's Candle or High Taper, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mummers at Hallowe'en in the Isle of Man, i. 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Munster, the King of, i. 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Münsterberg, precautions against witches in, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Münsterland, Easter fires in, i. 141;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muralug, dread of women at menstruation in, i. 78</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murderer, fire of oak-wood used to detect a, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murrain, need-fire kindled as a remedy for, i. 278, 282, 290 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt sacrifices to stay a, in England, Wales, and Scotland, 300 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>calf burnt alive to stop a, 300 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cattle buried to stop a, 326.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Cattle-Disease'>Cattle disease</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murray, the country of, i. 154 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murray River, in Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>natives of, their dread of menstruous women, i. 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muskau, in Lausitz, marriage oaks at, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myrtle-trees of the Patricians and Plebeians at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myths dramatized in ritual, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Na Ivilankata, a Fijian clan, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nagas of North-Eastern India, their ceremony of the new fire, i. 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nagual</foreign>, external soul, among the Indians of Guatemala and Honduras, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nahuqua Indians of Brazil, their use of bull-roarers, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Names on chimney-piece, divination by, i. 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of savages kept secret, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>new, taken by novices after initiation, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Namoluk, one of the Caroline Islands, traditionary origin of fire in, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Namuci and Indra, legend of, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Namur, Lenten fires in, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nandi, the, of British East Africa, their custom of driving sick cattle round a fire, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers among the, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nanga</foreign>, sacred enclosure in Fiji, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nanna, the wife of Balder, i. 102, 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nanny, a Yorkshire witch, i. 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naples, feast of the Nativity of the Virgin at, i. 220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Narrow openings, creeping through, in order to escape ghostly pursuers, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nathuram, image supposed to make women fruitful, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nativity of the Virgin, feast of the, i. 220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naudowessies, Indian tribe of North America, ritual of death and resurrection among the, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Naueld</foreign>, need-fire, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nauru, in the Marshall Islands, lives of people bound up with a fish in, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Navajoes, their story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers among the, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Navel-string buried under a plant or tree, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as brother or sister of child, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ndembo</foreign>, secret society on the Lower Congo, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ndolo, on the Moeko River, West Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neckar, the river, requires three human victims at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loaf thrown into the river, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Necklace, girl's soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>

<lg>
<l>Need-fire, i. 269 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled as a remedy for cattle-plague, 270 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 343;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cattle driven through the, 270 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>derivation of the name, 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled by the friction of a wheel, 270, 273, 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 292;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled with oak-wood, 271, 272, 275, 276, 278, 281, 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 294;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called <q>wild-fire,</q> 272, 273, 277;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled by fir-wood, 278, 282;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled as a remedy for witchcraft, 280, 292 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 293, 295;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called <q>living fire,</q> 281, 286;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>healing virtue ascribed to, 281, 286;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled by lime-wood, 281, 283, 286;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled by poplar-wood, 282;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as a barrier interposed between cattle and an evil spirit, 282, 285 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled by cornel-tree wood, 286;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revealed by an angel from heaven, 287;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to heat water, 289;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled on an island, 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled by birch-wood, 291;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled between two running streams, 292;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled to prevent fever, 297;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probable antiquity of the, 297 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kindled by elm-wood, 299;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the parent of the periodic fire-festivals, 299, 343;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used by Slavonic peoples to combat vampyres, 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sometimes kindled by the friction of fir, plane, birch, lime, poplar, cornel-wood, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Need-fire, John Ramsay's account of, i. 147 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lindenbrog on, 335 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Negro children pale at birth, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neil, R. A., on Gaelic name for mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neilgherry Hills, the Badagas of the, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Todas of the, i. 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neisse, precautions against witches in, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nellingen in Lorraine, simples gathered on Midsummer Day at, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nemi, the King of the Wood at, i. 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Lake of, annual tragedy enacted at, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacramental bread at, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Virbius at, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>; at evening, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred grove of, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priests of Diana at, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nerthus, old German goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nestelknüpfen</foreign>, i. 346 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nets fumigated with smoke of need-fire, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nettles, Indians beaten with, as an ordeal, i. 64</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neuchatel, Midsummer fires in the canton of, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neumann, J. B., on the Batta doctrine of souls, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neustadt, in Silesia, Midsummer fires at, i. 170;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>near Marburg, the need-fire at, 270</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New birth of novices at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; body obtained at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Britain, the Duk-duk society of i. 11, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fire kindled on Easter Saturday, i. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made at the New Year, 134 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 138, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made by the friction of wood at Christmas, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Guinea, British, festival of wild mango in, i. 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom observed after childbirth in, 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls at puberty in, 35;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread and seclusion of women at menstruation in, 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Toaripi of, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers in, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Guinea, German, the Kai of, ii. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of initiation in, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yabim of, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of initiation in, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Hebrides, conception of the external soul in the, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Ireland, seclusion of girls at puberty in, i. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Duk-duk society in, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mexico, the Zuni Indians of, i. 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Arizona, use of bull-roarers in, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; South Wales, dread of women at menstruation in, i. 78;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Wongh tribe of, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the drama of resurrection at initiation in, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; water at Easter, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; World, Easter ceremonies in the, i. 127 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical virtue of plants at Midsummer in the, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Year, new fire made at the, i. 134 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 138, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of Mohammedans in North Africa, 217 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Celtic, on November first, 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Fijian, Tahitian, and Hawaiian, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newstead, Byron's oak at, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nganga</foreign>, <q>the Knowing Ones,</q> initiates, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ngarong</foreign>, secret helper, of the Ibans of Borneo, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nguu, district of German East Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nias, story of the external soul told in the island of, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies performed by candidates for the priesthood in, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niceros and the were-wolf, story of, i. 313 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nidugala, in the Neilgherry Hills, the fire-walk at, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nieder-Lausitz, the Midsummer log in, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niederehe, in the Eifel Mountains, Midsummer flowers at, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>

<lg>
<l>Niger, belief as to external human souls lodged in animals on the, ii. <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nigeria, the Ibo of Southern, i. 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theory of the external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nigerian, South, story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Night-jars, the lives of women in, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called women's <q>sisters,</q> <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nikclerith, Neane, buries cow alive, i. 324 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nile, the Alur of the Upper, i. 64</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nine, ruptured child passed nine times on nine successive mornings through a cleft ash-tree and attended by nine persons, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bonfires on Midsummer Eve an omen of marriage, i. 174, 185, 189, 339</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; different kinds of wood burnt in the Beltane fires, i. 155;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used for the Midsummer bonfires, 172, 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in the need-fire, 271, 278;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to kindle need-fire, 278, 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; grains of oats in divination, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; leaps over Midsummer fire, i. 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; men employed to make fire by the friction of wood, i. 148, 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ridges of ploughed land in divination, i. 235</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sorts of flowers on Midsummer Eve, to dream on, i. 175;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; times to crawl under a bramble as a cure, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; times nine men make need-fire, i. 289, 294, 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; (thrice three) times passed through a girth of woodbine, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passed through a holed stone, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; turns round a rick, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niska Indians of British Columbia, rites of initiation among the, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nisus and his purple or golden hair, story of, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nkimba</foreign>, secret society on the Lower Congo, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nocturnal creatures the sex totems of men and women, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nograd-Ludany, in Hungary, Midsummer fires at, i. 179</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noguès, J. L. M., on the wonderful herbs of St. John's Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nootka Indians of Vancouver Island, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ritual of death and resurrection among the, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nord, the department of, giants at Shrove Tuesday in, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norden, E., on the Golden Bough, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nore, A. de, on the Yule log, i. 250 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norfolk, use of orpine for divination in, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norman peasants gather seven kinds of plants on St. John's Day, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Normandy, Midsummer fires in, i. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 252;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torch-light processions on Christmas Eve in, 266;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>processions with torches on the Eve of Twelfth Day, in, 340;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wonderful herbs and flowers gathered at Midsummer in, ii, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wreaths of mugwort in, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vervain gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norrland, Midsummer bonfires in, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norse stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>North American Indians, their personal totems, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Berwick, Satan preaches at, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northamptonshire, sacrifice of a calf in, i. 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northumberland, Midsummer fires in, i. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at Hallowe'en in, 245;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 256;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 288 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ox burnt alive in, to stop a murrain, 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norway, bonfires on Midsummer Eve in, i. 171;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the need-fire in, 280;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitions about a parasitic rowan in, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norwich, Easter candle in the cathedral of, i. 122 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nottinghamshire, the Hemlock Stone in, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Nouer l'aiguilette</foreign>, i. 346 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nouzon, in the Ardennes, the Yule log at, i. 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>November the first, old New Year's Day in the Isle of Man, i. 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the first of, All Saints' Day, 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Novice at initiation killed as a man and brought to life as an animal, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Novices (lads) at initiation supposed to be swallowed and disgorged by a spirit or monster, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to be newly born, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>begotten anew, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nurtunjas</foreign>, sacred poles among the Arunta, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nut-water brewed at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nuts passed across Midsummer fires, i. 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in fire, divination by, 237, 239, 241, 242, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nyanja chief, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nyanja-speaking tribes of Angoniland, their customs as to girls at puberty, i. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>

<lg>
<l>Nyassa, Lake, i. 28, 81;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>people to the east of, crawl through an arch as a precaution against sickness, evil spirits, etc., ii. <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oak associated with thunder, i. 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped by the Druids, ii. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the principal sacred tree of the Aryans, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human representatives of the oak perhaps originally burnt at the fire-festivals, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through a cleft oak as a cure for rupture or rickets, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life of, in mistletoe, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>struck by lightning oftener than any other tree of the European forest, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to bloom on Midsummer Eve, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and thunder, Aryan god of the, i. 265</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -leaves, <q>oil of St. John</q> found on St. John's Morning upon, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; log a protection against witchcraft, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mistletoe an <q>all-healer</q> or panacea, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a remedy for epilepsy, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to be shot down with an arrow, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a panacea for green wounds, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against conflagration, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Errol, fate of the Hays bound up with the, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Guelphs, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Romove, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Vespasian family at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; planted by Byron, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -spirit, the priest of the Arician grove a personification of an, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tree worshipped by the Cheremiss, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees planted at marriage, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; twigs and leaves used to keep off witches, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wood used to kindle the need-fire, i. 148, 271, 272, 275, 276, 278, 281, 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to kindle the Beltane fires, i. 148, 155;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to kindle Midsummer fire, 169, 177, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used for the Yule log, i. 248, 250, 251, 257, 258, 259, 260, 263, 264 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fire of, used to detect a murderer, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perpetual fires of, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oaks planted by Sir Walter Scott, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe growing on, in Sweden, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe growing on, in England and France, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oath not to hurt Balder, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oats, nine grains of, in divination, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oban district, Southern Nigeria, belief as to external human souls lodged in animals in the, ii. <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oberland, in Central Germany, the Yule log in the, i. 248 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obermedlingen, in Swabia, fire kindled on St. Vitus's Day at, i. 335 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obubura district of S. Nigeria, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>October, ceremony of the new fire in, i. 136;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the last day of (Hallowe'en), 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odessa, New Easter fire carried to, i. 130 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odin, Othin, or Woden, the father of Balder, i. 101, 102, 103 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ododop tribe of Southern Nigeria, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oels, in Silesia, Midsummer fires at, i. 170</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oeniadae, the ancient, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oesel, Midsummer fires in the island of, i. 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's herbs in the island of, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Offenburg, in the Black Forest, Midsummer fires at, i. 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ogboni, a secret society on the Slave Coast, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ogre whose soul was in a bird, story of the, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Oil of St. John</q> found on St. John's morning, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on oaks at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oise, French department of, dolmen in, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ojebways, ritual of death and resurrection among the, ii. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olala, secret society of the Niska Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olaus Magnus, on were-wolves, i. 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Old Wife</q> (<q>Old Woman</q>), burning the, i. 116, 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oldenburg, the immortal dame of, i. 100;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shrove Tuesday customs in, 120;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter bonfires in, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burning or boiling portions of animals or things to force witch to appear in, 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witch as toad in, 323;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through a cleft oak as a cure in, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom as to milking cows in, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sick children passed through a ring of yarn in, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Olea chrysophilla</foreign>, used as fuel for bonfire, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Oleander, the Sultan of the,</q> i. 18, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olive, the sacred, at Olympia, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olofaet, a fire-god, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olympia, the sacred olive at, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>white poplar used for sacrifices to Zeus at, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omaha tribe, Elk clan of the, i. 11</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; women secluded at menstruation, i. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>

<lg>
<l>Omens from birds and beasts, i. 56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from the smoke of bonfires, 116, 131, 337;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from flames of bonfires, 140, 142, 159, 165, 336, 337;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from cakes rolled down hill, 153;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from boiling milk, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from intestines of sheep, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of death, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of marriage drawn from Midsummer bonfires, i. 168, 174, 178, 185, 189, 339;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>drawn from bonfires, 338 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from flowers, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Onktehi, the great spirit of the waters among the Dacotas, ii. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oran, bathing at Midsummer in, i. 216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orange River, the Corannas of the, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Oraons'/>
<l>Oraons or Uraons of Bengal, their belief as to the transformation of witches into cats, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ordeal of stinging ants undergone by girls at puberty, i. 61, and by young men, 62 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of boiling resin, 311</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ordeals as an exorcism, i. 66;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>undergone by novices at initiation among the Bushongo, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Order of nature, different views of the, postulated by magic and science, ii. <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Organs, internal, of medicine-man replaced by a new set at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origin of fire, primitive ideas as to the, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orinoco, the Banivas of the, i. 66;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Guaraunos of the, 85; the Guayquiries of the, 85;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Tamanaks of the, 61 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ornament, external soul of woman in an ivory, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ornaments, amulets degenerate into, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orne, Midsummer fires in the valley of the, i. 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oro, West African bogey, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orpheus and the willow, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orpine (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sedum telephium</foreign>) at Midsummer, i. 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in divination at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orvieto, Midsummer fires at, i. 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oster-Kappeln, in Hanover, the oak of the Guelphs at, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osterode, Easter bonfires at, i. 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ot Danoms of Borneo, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otati tribe of Queensland, their treatment of girls at puberty, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ovambo, of German South-West Africa, custom observed by young women at puberty among the, ii. <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Owls, lives of persons bound up with those of, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sex totem of women, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called women's <q>sisters,</q> <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ox burnt alive to stop a murrain, i. 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -horns, external soul of chief in pair of, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ozieri, in Sardinia, bonfires on St. John's Eve at, i. 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Padua, story of a were-wolf in, i. 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paha, on the Gold Coast, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pale colour of negro children at birth, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palettes or plaques of schist in Egyptian tombs, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palm-branches, consecrated, at Easter, i. 121</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sunday, palm-branches consecrated on, i. 144, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boxwood blessed on, i. 184, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed used on, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees as life-indices, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papuan and Melanesian stocks in New Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papuans, life-trees among the, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paraguay, the Chiquites Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parallelism between witches and were-wolves, i. 315, 321</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parasitic mountain-ash (rowan) used to make the divining-rod, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; orchid growing on a tamarind, ritual at cutting, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; rowan, superstitions about a, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paris, effigy of giant burnt in summer fire at, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cats burnt alive at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parivarams of Madura, their seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parrot, external soul of warlock in a, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Punchkin, story of the, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parsees, their customs as to menstruous women, i. 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Partridge, C., ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paschal candle, i. 121, 122 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mountains, i. 141</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passage over or through fire a stringent form of purification, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>through a cleft stick in connexion with puberty and circumcision, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passes, Indians of Brazil, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 59</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passing over fire to get rid of ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>through cleft trees and other harrow openings to get rid of ghosts, etc., <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under a yoke as a purification, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>

<lg>
<l>Passing children through cleft trees, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children, sheep, and cattle through holes in the ground, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pastern-bone of a hare in a popular remedy, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pastures fumigated at Midsummer to drive away witches and demons, i. 170</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patani States, custom as to the after-birth in the, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paths, separate, for men and women, i. 78, 80, 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patiko, in the Uganda Protectorate, dread of lightning at, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paton, W. R., on the Golden Bough, ii. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patriarch of Jerusalem kindles the new fire at Easter, i. 129</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patrician myrtle-tree at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patschkau, precautions against witches near, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pâturages, processions with torches at, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pawnee story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pawnees, human sacrifices among the, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pazzi family at Florence, i. 126</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peace-making ceremony among the Masai, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pear-tree as life-index of girl, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -trees, torches thrown at, i. 108;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rarely attacked by mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peas, boiled, distributed by young married couples, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pebbles thrown into Midsummer fires, i. 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peguenches, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 59</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peking, life-tree of the Manchu dynasty at, ii. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelops at Olympia, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pemba, island of, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pendle, the forest of, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pennant, Thomas, on Beltane fires and cakes in Perthshire, i. 152;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Hallowe'en fires in Perthshire, 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pennefather River in Queensland, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treatment of girls at puberty on the, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penny-royal burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 213, 214;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pentamerone</hi>, the, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penzance, Midsummer fires at, i. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perche, Midsummer fires in, i. 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's herb gathered on Midsummer Eve in, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the <foreign rend='italic'>Chêne-Doré</foreign> in, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perforating arms and legs of young men, girls, and dogs as a ceremony, i. 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pergine, in the Tyrol, fern-seed at, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perigord, the Yule log in, i. 250 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 253;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magic herbs gathered at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crawling under a bramble as a cure for boils in, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perkunas, Lithuanian god, his perpetual fire, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Péronne, mugwort at Midsummer near, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persians celebrate a festival of fire at the winter solstice, i. 269</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perthshire, Beltane fires and cakes in, i. 152 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traces of Midsummer fires in, 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hallowe'en bonfires in, 230 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peru, ceremony of the new fire in, i. 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perun, the oak sacred to the god, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petronius, his story of the were-wolf, i. 313 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pett, Grace, a witch, i. 304</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petworth, in Sussex, cleft ash-trees used for the cure of rupture at, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phalgun, a Hindoo month, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philip and James, the Apostles, feast of, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piazza del Limbo at Florence, i. 126</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Picardy, Lenten fire-customs in, i. 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piedmont, belief as to the <q>oil of St. John</q> on St. John's morning in, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pietro in Guarano (Calabria), Easter custom at, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pig, roast, at Christmas, i. 259;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt sacrifice of a, 302</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pigeon, external soul of ogre in a, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul of dragon in a, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pigeon's egg, external soul of fairy being in, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pigeons deposit seed of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pigs sacrificed, i. 9;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven through Midsummer fire, 179;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven through the need-fire, 272, 273, 274 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 275 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 276 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 277, 278, 279, 297;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to monster who swallows novices at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilgrimages on Yule Night in Sweden, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pillar, external soul of ogre in a, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pima Indians, their purification for manslaughter, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pines, Scotch, struck by lightning, proportion of, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pinewood, fire of, at Soracte, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pinoeh, district of South-Eastern Borneo, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pippin, king of the Franks, i. 270</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pitlochrie, in Perthshire, i. 230</l>
</lg>

<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>

<lg>
<l>Pitrè, Giuseppe, on St. John's Day in Sicily, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Placci, Carlo, i. 127 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Place de Noailles at Marseilles, Midsummer flowers in the, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plane and birch, fire made by the friction of, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plantain-tree, creeping through a cleft, as a cure, ii. <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plants, spirits of, in the form of snakes, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul in, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and trees as life-indices, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plaques or palettes of schist in Egyptian tombs, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plates or basins, divination by three, i. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 240, 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato, on the distribution of the soul in the body, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plebeian myrtle-tree at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pleiades, beginning of year determined by observation of the, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny on <q>serpents' eggs,</q> i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on medicinal plants, 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the touch of menstruous women, 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the fire-walk of the Hirpi Sorani, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the mythical springwort, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Druidical worship of mistletoe, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the virtues of mistletoe, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the birds which deposit seeds of mistletoe, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the different kinds of mistletoe, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plough, piece of Yule log inserted in the, i. 251, 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ploughing in spring, custom at the first, i. 18</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ploughshare, crawling under a, as a cure, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plum-tree wood used for Yule log, i. 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plurality of souls, doctrine of the, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutarch, on oak-mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pogdanzig, witches' Sabbath at, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pointing sticks or bones in magic, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poitou, Midsummer fires in, i. 182, 190 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 340 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires on All Saints' Day in, 246;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 251 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mugwort at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poix, Lenten fires at, i. 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poland, need-fire in, i. 281 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Polaznik</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>polazenik</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>polažaynik</foreign>, Christmas visiter, i. 261, 263, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pole, sacred, of the Arunta, i. 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poles, passing between two poles after a death, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passing between two poles in order to escape sickness or evil spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pollution, menstrual, widespread fear of, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polygnotus, his picture of Orpheus under the willow, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomerania, hills called the Blocksberg in, i. 171 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pommerol, Dr., i. 112</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pond, G. H., on ritual of death and resurrection among the Dacotas, ii. <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pongol or Feast of Ingathering in Southern India, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontesbury, in Shropshire, the Yule log at, i. 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Popinjay, shooting at a, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Popish Kingdome, The</hi>, of Thomas Kirchmeyer, i. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poplar, the white, used in sacrificing to Zeus at Olympia, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>black, mistletoe on, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wood used to kindle need-fire, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porcupine as charm to ensure women an easy delivery, i. 49</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Port Lincoln tribe of South Australia, their superstition as to lizards, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Porta Triumphalis</foreign> at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Portrait statues, external souls of Egyptian kings deposited in, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Portreach, sacrifice of a calf near, i. 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poseidon makes Pterelaus immortal, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priest of, uses a white umbrella, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Posidonius, Greek traveller in Gaul, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poso in Central Celebes, custom at the working of iron in, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Alfoors of, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Possession by an evil spirit cured by passing through a red-hot chain, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potawatomi women secluded at menstruation, i. 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Potlatch</foreign>, distribution of property, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pots used by girls at puberty broken, i. 61, 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Powers, extraordinary, ascribed to first-born children, i. 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Požega district of Slavonia, need-fire in, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prättigau in Switzerland, Lenten fire-custom at, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayers of adolescent girls to the Dawn of Day, i. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 53, 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for rain, 133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pretence of throwing a man into fire, i. 148, 186, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priapus, image of, at need-fire, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priest of Aricia and the Golden Bough, i. 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Earth, taboos observed by the, 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Diana at Aricia, the King of the Wood, perhaps personified Jupiter, ii. <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Nemi, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priestesses not allowed to step on ground, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priests expected to pass through fire, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Primitive thought, its vagueness and inconsistency, ii. <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>

<lg>
<l>Prince Sunless, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Wales Island, Torres Strait, treatment of girls at puberty in, i. 40</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Princess royal, ceremonies at the puberty of a, i. 29, 30<hi rend='italic'> sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Procession with lighted tar-barrels on Christmas Eve, i. 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Processions with lighted torches through fields, gardens, orchards, etc., i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 110 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 113 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 141, 179, 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 266, 339 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Corpus Christi Day, 165;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to the Midsummer bonfires, 184, 185, 187, 188, 191, 192, 193;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>across fiery furnaces, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of giants (effigies) at popular festivals in Europe, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Profligacy at Holi festival in India, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophecy, the Norse Sibyl's, i. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proserpine River in Queensland, i. 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Provence, Midsummer fires in, i. 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 249 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prussia, Midsummer fires in, i. 176 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mullein gathered at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches' Sabbath in, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Eastern, herbs gathered at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by flowers on Midsummer Eve in, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief as to mistletoe growing on a thorn in, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prussian custom before first ploughing in spring, i. 18</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prussians, the old, worshipped serpents, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pterelaus and his golden hair, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puberty, girls secluded at, i. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fast and dream at, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pretence of killing the novice and bringing him to life again during initiatory rites at, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New Mexico, use of bull-roarers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pulayars of Travancore, their seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pulverbatch, in Shropshire, the Yule log at, i. 257;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief as the bloom of the oak on Midsummer Eve at, ii. <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pumpkin, external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Punchkin and the parrot, story of, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Punjaub, supernatural power ascribed to the first-born in the, i. 295;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passing unlucky children through narrow openings in the, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purification by stinging with ants, i. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by beating, 61, 64 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of mourners by fire, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>after a death, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by passing under a yoke, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purificatory theory of the fires of the fire-festivals, i. 329 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 341, ii. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>more probable than the solar theory, i. 346</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purple loosestrife (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Lythrum salicaria</foreign>) gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Purra</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>poro</foreign>, secret society in Sierra Leone, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puttenham, George, on the Midsummer giants, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyrenees, Midsummer fires in the French, i. 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quarter-ill, a disease of cattle, i. 296</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quedlinburg, in the Harz Mountains, need-fire at, i. 276</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queen Charlotte Islands, the Haida Indians of, i. 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Heaven, ii. <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Summer, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queen's County, Midsummer fires in, i. 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at Hallowe'en in, 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queensland, sorcery in, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls at puberty in, 37 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread of women at menstruation in, 78;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>natives of, their mode of ascertaining the fate of an absent friend, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers in, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Quimba</foreign>, a secret society on the Lower Congo, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quimper, Midsummer fires at, i. 184</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quirinus, sanctuary of, at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Races at fire-festivals, i. 111;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to Easter bonfire, 122;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Easter fires, 144;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with torches at Midsummer, 175.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Torch-Races'>Torch-races</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Radium, bearing of its discovery on the probable duration of the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rahu, a tribal god in India, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rain, Midsummer bonfires supposed to stop, i. 188, 336;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bull-roarers used as magical instruments to make, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -clouds, smoke made in imitation of, i. 133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -makers (mythical), i. 133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -water in Morocco, magical virtues ascribed to, i. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raking a rick in the devil's name, i. 243;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ashes, a mode of divination, 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ralston, W. R. S., on sacred fire of Perkunas, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rama, his battle with the King of Ceylon, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rampart, old, of Burghead, i. 267 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramsay, John, of Ochtertyre, on Beltane fires, i. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Midsummer fires, 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Hallowe'en fires, 230 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on burying cattle alive, 325 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rarhi, Brahmans of Bengal, their seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 68</l>
</lg>

<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>

<lg>
<l>Rat, external soul of medicine-man in, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rattan, creeping through a split, to escape a malignant spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rattle used at a festival, i. 28</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rattles to frighten ghosts, i. 52</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raven clan, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ray-fish, cure for wound inflicted by a, i. 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raymi, a festival of the summer solstice, i. 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reapers throw sickles blindfold at last sheaf, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reaping, girdle of rye a preventive of weariness in, i. 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reay, in Sutherland, the need-fire at, i. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Red earth or paint smeared on girls at puberty, i. 30, 31;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girl's face painted red at puberty, 49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 54;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>women at menstruation painted, 78</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and white, girls at puberty painted, i. 35, 38, 39, 40;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>women at menstruation painted, 78</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -hot iron chain, passing persons possessed by evil spirits through a, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Island, i. 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ochre round a woman's mouth, mark of menstruation, i. 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Redemption from the fire, i. 110</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reed, W. A., on a superstition as to a parasitic plant, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reed, split, used in cure for dislocation, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reef, plain of, in Tiree, i. 316</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Regaby, in the Isle of Man, i. 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reindeer sacrificed to the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, O. Frh. von, on the Yule log, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reiskius, Joh., on the need-fire, i. 271 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religion, movement of thought from magic through religion to science, ii. <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religious associations among the Indians of North America, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Remedies, magical, not allowed to touch the ground, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renewal of fire, annual, in China, i. 137.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Fire'>Fire</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rengen, in the Eifel Mountains, Midsummer flowers at, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resoliss, parish of, in Ross-shire, burnt sacrifice of a pig in, i. 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resurrection, ritual of death and, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reuzes, wicker giants in Brabant and Flanders, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revin, Midsummer fires at, i. 188</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhenish Prussia, Lenten fires in, i. 115</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rheumatism, crawling under a bramble as a cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhine, the Lower, need-fire on, i. 278;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's wort on, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhodesia, the Winamwanga of, ii. <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rhodomyrtus tomentosus</foreign>, used to kindle fire by friction, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhön Mountains, Lenten custom in the, i. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhys, Sir John, on Beltane fires, i. 157;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on driving cattle through fires, 159;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on old New Year's Day in the Isle of Man, 224;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Hallowe'en bonfires in Wales, 239 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on burnt sacrifices in the Isle of Man, 305 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on alleged Welsh name for mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ribble, the, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ribwort gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rickard, R. H., quoted, i. 34</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rickets, children passed through cleft ash-trees as a cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through cleft oaks as a cure for, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through a holed stone as a cure for, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rickety children passed through a natural wooden ring, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Riedel, J. G. F., on the Kakian association in Ceram, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rif, province of Morocco, Midsummer fires in, i. 214 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 215;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing at Midsummer in, 216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Riga, Midsummer festival at, i. 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Right hand, luckiness of the, i. 151 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; turn (<foreign rend='italic'>deiseal</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>dessil</foreign>) in the Highlands of Scotland, i. 150 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rigveda, how Indra cured Apala in the, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ring'/>
<l>Ring, crawling through a, as a cure or preventive of disease, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by a, i. 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by initiates as token of the new birth, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Rings'>Rings</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ringhorn, Balder's ship, i. 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ringing church bells on Midsummer Eve, custom as to, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Rings'/>
<l>Rings as amulets, i. 92;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mourners creep through, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Ring'>Ring</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rio de Janeiro, i. 59</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Negro, ordeals of young men among the Indians of the, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Risley, Sir Herbert H., on Indian fire-walk, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritual, myths dramatized in, i. 105;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of death and resurrection, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rivers, Dr. W. H. R., on <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rivers, menstruous women not allowed to cross or bathe in, i. 77, 97;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>claim human victims at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing in, at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>

<lg>
<l>Rizano, in Dalmatia, the Yule log at, i. 263</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robertson, Rev. James, quoted, i. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robinson, C. H., on human life bound up with that of an animal, ii. <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rochholz, C. L., on need-fire, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rocks, sick people passed through holes in, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman belief as to menstruous women, i. 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cure for dislocation, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romans deemed sacred the places which were struck by lightning, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romanus Lecapenus, emperor, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rome, the sacred fire of Vesta at, i. 138, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer Day in ancient, i. 178;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>myrtle-trees of the Patricians and Plebeians at, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak of the Vespasian family at, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romove, sacred oak and perpetual fire at, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roof of house, the external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rook, the island of, initiation of young men in, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roscher, Dr. W. H., on the Roman ceremony of passing under a yoke, ii. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roscoe, Rev. J., on life-trees of kings of Uganda, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on passing through a cleft stick or a narrow opening as a cure, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roscommon, County, divination at Hallowe'en in, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rose-tree, death in a blue, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roses, festival of the Crown of, i. 195;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the King and Queen of, 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ross-shire, Beltane cakes in, i. 153;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt sacrifice of a pig in, 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rotenburg on the Neckar, offering to the river on St. John's Day, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the wicked weaver of, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rottenburg, in Swabia, burning the Angel-man at, i. 167;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precautions against witches on Midsummer Eve at, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roumanians of Transylvania, their belief as to the sacredness of bread, i. 13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Rowan'/>
<l>Rowan, parasitic, esteemed effective against witchcraft, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitions about a, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how it is to be gathered, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be touched with iron and not to fall on the ground, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tree a protection against witches, i. 154, 327 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hoop of, sheep passed through a, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Mountain-ash</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rubens, painter, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rucuyennes of Brazil, ordeal of young men among the, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rue aux Ours at Paris, effigy of giant burnt in the, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rue burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 213</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rügen, sick persons passed through a cleft oak in, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rum, island of, and the Lachlin family, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rupert's Day, effigy burnt on, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rupt in the Vosges, Lenten fires at, i. 109;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log at, 254</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rupture, children passed through cleft ash-trees or oaks as a cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russia, Midsummer fires in, i. 176, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, i. 281, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treatment of the effigy of Kupalo in, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Letts of, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purple loose-strife gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees in, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russian feast of Florus and Laurus, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; story of Koshchei the deathless, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rustem and Isfendiyar, i. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ruthenia, Midsummer bonfires in, i. 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rye, girdles of, a preventive of weariness in reaping, i. 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saale, the river, claims a human victim on Midsummer Day, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saaralben in Lorraine, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabbaths of witches on the Eve of May Day and Midsummer Eve, i. 171 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 181, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacramental bread at Nemi, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; meal at initiation in Fiji, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacred flutes played at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings put to death, i. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; persons not allowed to set foot on the ground, i. 2 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to see the sun, i. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; stick (<foreign rend='italic'>churinga</foreign>), ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifice of cattle at holy oak, i. 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of heifer at kindling need-fire, 290;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of an animal to stay a cattle-plague, 300 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of reindeer to the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifices, human, at fire-festivals, i. 106;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traces of, 146, 148, 150 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 186, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered by the ancient Germans, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Celts of Gaul, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the victims perhaps witches and wizards, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>W. Mannhardt's theory, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Sacrificial fonts</q> in Sweden, i. 172 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Sada</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Saza</foreign>, Persian festival of fire at the winter solstice, i. 269</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sage, divination by sprigs of red, on Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>

<lg>
<l>Sagittarius, mistletoe cut when the sun is in the sign of, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sahagun, B. de, on the treatment of witches and wizards among the Aztecs, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saibai, island of Torres Strait, treatment of girls at puberty in, i. 40 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sail Dharaich, Sollas, in North Uist, need-fire at, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Antony, wood of, i. 110</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Brandon, church of, in Ireland, sick women pass through a window of the, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Christopher, name given to Midsummer giant at Salisbury, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Columb Kill, festival of, i. 241</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Corona, church of, at Koppenwal, holed stone in the, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saint-Denis-des-Puits, the oak of, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Eloi, Bishop of Noyon, his denunciation of heathen practices, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Estapin, festival of, on August the sixth, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. George's Day, i. 223 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Hubert blesses bullets with which to shoot witches, i. 315 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. James's Day (July the twenty-fifth), the flower of chicory cut on, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Jean, in the Jura, Midsummer fire-custom at, i. 189</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-St-John'/>
<l>St. John blesses the flowers on Midsummer Eve, i. 171;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his hair looked for in ashes of Midsummer fire, 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires of, in France, 183, 188, 189, 190, 192, 193;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prayers to, at Midsummer, 210;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>claims human victims on St. John's Day (Midsummer Day), ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>print of his head on St. John's Eve, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oil of, found on oak leaves, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Knights of, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Grand Master of the Order of, i. 211</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the Baptist associated by the Catholic Church with Midsummer Day, i. 160, 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John's blood found on St. John's wort and other plants at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John's College, Oxford, the Christmas candle at, i. 255</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day, Midsummer fires on, i. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 171 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 178, 179;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fire kindled by friction of wood on, 281;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed blooms on, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Midsummer'>Midsummer</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve (Midsummer Eve) in Malta, i. 210 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wonderful herbs gathered on, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sick children passed through cleft trees on, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John's fires among the South Slavs, i. 178;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Esthonians, 180.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Midsummer-Fires'>Midsummer fires</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; flower at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered on St. John's Eve (Midsummer Eve), <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; girdle, mugwort, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; herbs gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against evil spirits, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Night (Midsummer Eve), precautions against witches on, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; oil on oaks at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; root (<foreign rend='italic'>Johanniswurzel</foreign>), the male fern, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-St-Johns-Wort'/>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; wort (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hypericum perforatum</foreign>), garlands of, at Midsummer, i. 169 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered on St. John's Day or Eve (Midsummer Day or Eve), ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against thunder, witches, and evil spirits, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thrown into the Midsummer bonfires, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Juan Capistrano, in California, ordeal of nettles and ants among the Indians of, i. 64</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Julien, church of, at Ath, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Just, in Cornwall, Midsummer fire-custom at, i. 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Lawrence family, their lives bound up with an old tree at Howth castle, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Martin invoked to disperse a mist, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Mary at Lübeck, church of, i. 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-St-Michael'/>
<l>St. Michael's cake, i. 149, 154 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Nonnosius, relics of, in the cathedral of Freising, Bavaria, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Patrick and the Beltane fires, i. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Patrick's Chair, i. 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mount, i. 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter, the Eve of, Midsummer fires in Ireland on, i. 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and St. Paul, celebration of their day in London, i. 196</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter's at Rome, new fire at Easter in, i. 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day, bonfires in Belgium on, i. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bonfires at Eton on, 197;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires in Scotland on, 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve, bonfires on, i. 195, 198, 199 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathering herbs on, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Rochus's day, need-fire kindled on, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Thomas's day (21st December), bonfires on, i. 266;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches dreaded on, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mount, near Madras, the fire-walk at, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saint-Valery in Picardy, i. 113</l>
</lg>

<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>

<lg>
<l>St. Vitus's dance, mistletoe a cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day, <q>fire of heaven</q> kindled on, i. 335</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Wolfgang, Falkenstein chapel of, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saintes-Maries, Midsummer custom at, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saintonge, the Yule log in, i. 251 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wonderful herbs gathered on St. John's Eve in, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's wort in, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vervain gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n. 4</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>four-leaved clover at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Aunis, Midsummer fires in, i. 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salee, in Morocco, Midsummer fires at, i. 214, 216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salisbury, Midsummer giants at, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salop (Shropshire), fear of witchcraft in, i. 342 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salt, prohibition to eat, i. 19, 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in a ceremony after marriage, 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abstinence from, associated with a rule of chastity, 26 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prohibition to taste, 60, 68, 69;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be handled by menstruous women, 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by, 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cake, divination by, i. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samhain, Eve of, in Ireland, i. 139, 225, 226;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All Saints' Day in Ireland, 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Samhanach</foreign>, Hallowe'en bogies, i. 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Samhnagan</foreign>, Hallowe'en fires, i. 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samland fishermen will not go to sea on Midsummer Day, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samoan story of woman who was impregnated by the sun, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samoyed shamans, their familiar spirits in boars, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samson, effigy of, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an African, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>San Salvador in West Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctity and uncleanness not clearly differentiated in the primitive mind, i. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctuary of Balder, i. 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sand, souls of ogres in a grain of, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sandhill, in Northumberland, Midsummer fires at, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sangerhausen, i. 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sangro, river, i. 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sankuru River, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Santa Catalina Istlavacan, birth-names of the Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Maria Piedigrotta at Naples, i. 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sapor, king of Persia, i. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarajevo, need-fire near, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardinia, Midsummer fires in, i. 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Satan preaches a sermon in the church of North Berwick, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brings fern-seed on Christmas night, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Satapatha Brahmana</hi>, on the sun as Death, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturday, Easter, new fire on, i. 121, 122, 124, 127, 128, 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>second-sight of persons born on a, 285</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturnalia at puberty of a princess royal, i. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>license of the, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saucers, divination by seven, i. 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savage, secretiveness of the, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread of sorcery, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxo Grammaticus, Danish historian, i. 102 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his account of Balder, 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxons of Transylvania, story of the external soul among the, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxony, fires to burn the witches in, i. 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Wends of, ii. <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Lower, the need-fire in, i. 272</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scania, Midsummer fires in, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schaffhausen, St. John's three Midsummer victims at, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schar mountains of Servia, need-fire in the, i. 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Scharholz</foreign>, Midsummer log in Germany, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schaumburg, Easter bonfires in, i. 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schlegel, G., on Chinese festival of fire, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schlich, W., on mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus europaeus</foreign>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schlochau, district of, witches' Sabbath in, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schöllbronn in Baden, <q>thunder poles</q> at, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schoolcraft, Henry R., on renewal of fire, i. 134 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schürmann, C. W., on the Port Lincoln tribe of South Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Schvannes</foreign>, bonfires, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schweina, in Thuringia, Christmas bonfire at, i. 265 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schwenda, witches burnt at, i. 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Science, movement of thought from magic through religion to, ii. <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and magic, different views of natural order postulated by the two, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scira, an Athenian festival, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Scoring above the breath,</q> cutting a witch on the forehead, i. 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>counter-spell to witchcraft, 343 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotch Highlanders, their belief in bogies at Hallowe'en, i. 227;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief as to Snake Stones, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotland, sacred wells in, i. 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Celts called <q>thunder-bolts</q> in, 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Snake Stones in, 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of Grannus in, i. 112;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Beltane fires in, 146 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 206 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at Hallowe'en in, 229, 234 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 289 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>animals burnt alive as a sacrifice in, 302;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>scoring above the breath,</q> a counter-charm for witchcraft in, 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches as hares in, 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's wort in, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod in, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Highlands'>Highlands</ref> <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> <ref target='Index-Highlanders'>Highlanders</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scots pine, mistletoe on, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scott, Sir Walter, on the fear of witchcraft, i. 343;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oaks planted by, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scourging girls at puberty, i. 66 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Scouvion</foreign>, i. 108.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Escouvion'><foreign rend='italic'>Escouvion</foreign></ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scratching the person with the fingers forbidden to girls at puberty, i. 38, 39, 41, 42, 44, 47, 50, 53, 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scrofula, vervain a cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creeping through an arch of vines as a cure for, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passage through a holed stone a cure for, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scylla, daughter of Nisus, the story of her treachery, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythes and bill-hooks set out to cut witches as they fall from the clouds, i. 345 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sea, menstruous women not allowed to approach the, i. 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing in the, at Easter, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing in the, at Midsummer, 208, 210, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>demands a human victim on Midsummer Day, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seal, descendants of the, in Sutherlandshire, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seats placed for souls of dead at the Midsummer fires, i. 183, 184</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in folk-tales, 70 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reasons for the, 76 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of novices at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of women at menstruation, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Secret language learnt at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; societies and totem clans, related to each other, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Secretiveness of the savage, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sedbury Park oak, in Gloucestershire, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sedum telephium</foreign>, orpine, used in divination at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seed-corn, charred remains of Midsummer log mixed with the, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seeman, Berthold, on St. John's blood, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seler, Professor E., on nagual, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Semo</foreign>, a secret society of Senegambia, ii. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senal Indians of California, their notion as to fire stored in trees, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senegambia, the Walos of, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secret society in, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sennar, a province of the Sudan, human hyaenas in, i. 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Separation of children from their parents among the Baganda, i. 23 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>September, eve of the first of, new fire on the, i. 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the eighth, feast of the Nativity of the Virgin, 220;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fire-walk in, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Serpent'/>
<l>Serpent, girls at puberty thought to be visited by a, i. 31;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to swallow girl at puberty, 57;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ten-headed, external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>twelve-headed, external soul of demon in a, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul of chief in a, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Snake'>Snake</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serpents burnt alive at the Midsummer festival in Luchon, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches turn into, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped by the old Prussians, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the worship of Demeter, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the familiars of witches, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirits of the dead incarnate in, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serpents' eggs (glass beads) in ancient Gaul, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servia, Midsummer fire custom in, i. 178;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 258 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 281, 282 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servian stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servians, house-communities of the, i. 259 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Setonje, in Servia, need-fire at, i. 282 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seven bonfires, lucky to see, i. 107, 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; leaps over Midsummer fire, i. 213</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sorts of plants gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; years, a were-wolf for, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 316 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sex-Totems'/>
<l>Sex totems among the natives of South-Eastern Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called <q>brother</q> and <q>sister</q> by men and women respectively, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sexes, danger apprehended from the relation of the, ii. <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seyf el-Mulook and the jinnee, the story of, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sgealoir, the burying-ground of, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Sgreball</foreign>, three pence, i. 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sham-fights at New Year, i. 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shamans of the Yakuts and Samoyeds keep their external souls in animals, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shamash, the Assyrian sun-god, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shanga, city in East Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shawnee prophet, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheaf, the last cut at harvest, the Yule log wrapt up in, i. 248;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reapers blindfold throw sickles at the, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheaves of wheat or barley burnt in Midsummer fires, i. 215</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheep made to tread embers of extinct Midsummer fires, i. 182;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven over
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
ashes of Midsummer fires, 192;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt to stop disease in the flock, 301;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt alive as a sacrifice in the Isle of Man, 306;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witch in shape of a black, 316;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven through fire, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omens drawn from the intestines of, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passed through a hole in a rock to rid them of disease, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shells used in ritual of death and resurrection, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sherbro, Sierra Leone, secret society in the, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shirley Heath, cleft ash-tree at, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shirt, wet, divination by, i. 236, 241</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shoe, divination by thrown, i. 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shoes of boar's skin worn by king at inauguration, i. 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical plants at Midsummer put in, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shooting at the sun on Midsummer Day, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; at witches in the clouds, i. 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Shot-a-dead</q> by fairies, i. 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shropshire, the Yule log in, i. 257;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fear of witchcraft in, 342 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the oak thought to bloom on Midsummer Eve in, ii. <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shrove Tuesday, effigies burnt on, i. 120;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>straw-man burnt on, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wicker giants on, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cats burnt alive on, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod cut on, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of striking a hen dead on, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shuswap Indians of British Columbia, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girls at puberty forbidden to eat anything that bleeds, 94;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fence themselves with thorn bushes against ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personal totems among the, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief as to trees struck by lightning, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siam, king of, not allowed to set foot on ground, i. 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tree-spirit in serpent form in, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siamese, their explanation of a first menstruation, i. 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their story of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siberia, marriage custom in, i. 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external souls of shamans in, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sibyl, the Norse, her prophecy, i. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sibyl's wish, the, i. 99</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sicily, Midsummer fires in, i. 210;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's Day (Midsummer Day) regarded as dangerous and unlucky in, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's wort in, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sickness, bonfires a protection against, i. 108, 109;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred to animal, ii. <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sieg, the Yule log in the valley of the, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siena, the, of the Ivory Coast, their totemism, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sierck, town on the Moselle, i. 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sierra Leone, birth-trees in, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secret society in, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sieve, divination by, i. 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sikkhim, custom after a funeral in, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silence compulsory on girls at puberty, i. 29, 57;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ritual, 123, 124, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silesia, Spachendorf in, i. 119;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires to burn the witches in, 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 170 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 175;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 278;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches as cats in, 319 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by flowers on Midsummer Eve in, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silius Italicus, on the fire-walk of the Hirpi Sorani, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sill of door, unlucky children passed under the, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silver sixpence or button used to shoot witches with, i. 316</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silvia and Mars, story of, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simeon, prince of Bulgaria, his life bound up with the capital of a column, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simla, i. 12</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simurgh and Rustem, i. 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin-offering, i. 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Singhalese, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Singleton, Miss A. H., ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siouan tribes of North America, names of clans not used in ordinary conversation among the, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sioux or Dacotas, ritual of death and resurrection among the, ii. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sipi in Northern India, i. 12</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sirius, how the Bushmen warm up the star, i. 332 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sister's Beam (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sororium tigillum</foreign>) at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sisyphus, the stone of, i. 298</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sixpence, silver, witches shot with a, i. 316</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sixth day of the moon, mistletoe cut on the, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sixty years, cycles of, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skin disease, traditional cure of, in India, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaping over ashes of fire as remedy for, 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sky, girls at puberty not allowed to look at the, i. 43, 45, 46, 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skye, island of, i. 289;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the need-fire in, 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slane, the hill of, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slave Coast, custom of widows on the, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers on the, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavonia, the Yule log in, i. 262 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 282</l>
</lg>

<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>

<lg>
<l>Slavonian (South) peasants, the measures they take to bring down witches from the clouds, i. 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavonic peoples, need-fire among, i. 280 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavs, the oak a sacred tree among the, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak wood used to kindle sacred fires among the, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the South, Midsummer fires among the, i. 178;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log among the, 247, 258 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination from flowers at Midsummer among the, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in the activity of witches at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire sometimes kindled by the friction of oak-wood among the, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sleep, magic, at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sligo, the Druids' Hill in County, i. 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slope of Big Stones in Harris, i. 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slovenians, their belief in the activity of witches on Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, a spectral, i. 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smoke made in imitation of rain-clouds, i. 133;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to stupefy witches in the clouds, 345;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to fumigate sheep and cattle, ii. <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of bonfires, omens drawn from the, i. 116, 131, 337;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intended to drive away dragons, 161;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>allowed to pass over corn, 201, 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Midsummer bonfires a preservative against ills, i. 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against disease, 192;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beneficial effects of, 214 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Midsummer herbs a protection against thunder and lightning, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to fumigate cattle, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of need-fire used to fumigate fruit-trees, nets, and cattle, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smyth, R. Brough, on menstruous women in Australia, i. 13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Snake'/>
<l>Snake said to wound a girl at puberty, i. 56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seven-headed, external soul of witch in a, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul of medicine-man in, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Serpent'>Serpent</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Stones, superstitions as to, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief of the Scottish Highlanders concerning, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snakes, fat of, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to congregate on Midsummer Eve or the Eve of May Day, 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charm against, 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirits of plants and trees in the form of, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sympathetically related to human beings, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snow, external soul of a king in, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Societies, secret, and clans, totemic, related to each other, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sodewa Bai and the golden necklace, story of, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soemara, in Celebes, were-wolf at, i. 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sofala in East Africa, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sogamoso, heir to the throne of, not allowed to see the sun, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sogne Fiord in Norway, Balder's Grove on the, i. 104, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solar festival in spring, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; theory of the fires of the fire-festivals, i. 329, 331 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solstice, the summer, new fire kindled at the, i. 132, 133;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its importance for primitive man, 160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the winter, celebrated as the Birthday of the Sun, i. 246;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Persian festival of fire at the, 269</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solstices, the old pagan festivals of the two, consecrated as the birthdays of Christ and St. John the Baptist, i. 181 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festivals of fire at the, 246, 247, 331 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed gathered at the, ii. <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe gathered at the, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solstitial fires perhaps sun-charms, ii. <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soma, Hindoo deity, i. 99 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Somme, the river, i. 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the department of, mugwort at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Somersetshire, Midsummer fires in, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sonnerat, French traveller, on the fire-walk in India, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soosoos of Senegambia, their secret society, ii. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soracte, fire-walk of the Hirpi Sorani on Mount, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Soranian Wolves at, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Soranian Wolves</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Hirpi Sorani</foreign>), ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Soracte, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soranus, Italian god, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sorcerers, Midsummer herbs a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>detected by St. John's wort, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>detected by fern root, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sorcery'/>
<l>Sorcery, pointing sticks or bones in, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bonfires a protection against, 156;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sprigs of mullein protect cattle against, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>savage dread of, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Witchcraft'>Witchcraft</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and witchcraft, Midsummer plants and flowers a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sorcha, the King of, in a Celtic tale, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Soul'/>
<l>Soul, the notion of, a quasi-scientific hypothesis, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the unity and indivisibility of the, a theological dogma, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of chief in sacred grove, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>

<lg>
<l>Soul of child deposited in a coco-nut, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deposited in a bag, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bound up with knife, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of iron, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of ruptured person passes into cleft oak-tree, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of woman at childbirth deposited in a chopping-knife, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the external, in folk-tales, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in parrot, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in bird, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in necklace, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a fish, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in cock, pigeon, starling, spinning-wheel, pillar, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a bee, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a lemon, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a tree, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a barley plant, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a box, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a firebrand, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in hair, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in snow, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in two or three doves, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a ten-headed serpent, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a pumpkin, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a spear, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a dragon, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a gem, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in an egg, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a duck's egg, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a blue rose-tree, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a bird, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a pigeon, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a light, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a flower, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in grain of sand, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a stone, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a thorn, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a gem, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a pigeon's egg, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a dove's egg, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a box-tree, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the flower of the acacia, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a sparrow, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a beetle, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a bottle, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a golden cock-chafer, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a dish, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a precious stone, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a bag, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a white herb, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a wasp, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a twelve-headed serpent, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a golden ring, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in seven little birds, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a seven-headed snake, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a quail, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a vase, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a golden sword and a golden arrow, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in entrails, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a golden fish, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a hair as hard as copper, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a cat, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a bear, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a buffalo, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in inanimate things, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a hemlock branch, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in folk-custom, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a mountain scaur, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ox-horns, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in roof of house, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a tree, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a spring of water, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in capital of column, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a portrait statue, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in plants, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in animals, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of shaman or medicine-man in animal, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept in totem, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -boxes, amulets as, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -stones, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -stuff of ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soulless King, whose soul was in a duck's egg, Lithuanian story of the, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Souls of dead sit round the Midsummer fire, i. 183, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of people at a house-warming collected in a bag, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>male and female, in Chinese philosophy, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the plurality of, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, transmigrate into their totemic animals, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sow, the cropped black, at Hallowe'en, i. 239, 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sower, the Wicked, driving away, i. 107, 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sowerby, James, on mouse-ear hawk-weed, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on orpine, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on yellow hoary mullein, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Golden Bough, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on mistletoe, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sowing hemp seed, divination by, i. 235</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spachendorf, in Silesia, effigy burnt at, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spae-wives and Gestr, Icelandic story of the, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spain, Midsummer fires and customs in, i. 208;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vervain gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spark Sunday in Switzerland, i. 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sparks of Yule log prognosticate chickens, lambs, foals, calves, etc., i. 251, 262, 263, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sparrow, external soul of a jinnee in a, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spear used to help women in hard labour, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Speicher, in the Eifel, St. John's fires at, i. 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spell recited at kindling need-fire, i. 290;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of witchcraft broken by suffering, 304</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spells cast on cattle, i. 301, 302;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cast by witches on union of man and wife, 346</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spencer (B.) and Gillen (F. J.) on initiation of medicine-man, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spinning-wheel, external soul of ogress in a, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirit or god of vegetation, effigies of, burnt in spring, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reasons for burning, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaf-clad representative of, burnt, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirits of the hills, their treasures, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of plants and trees in the form of snakes, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of water propitiated at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spree, the river, requires its human victim on Midsummer Day, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spreewald, the Wends of the, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sprenger, the inquisitor, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>

<lg>
<l>Spring of water, external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Springs, underground, detected by divining-rod, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Springwort, mythical plant, procured at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reveals treasures, opens all locks, and makes the bearer invisible and invulnerable, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sproat, G. M., on seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spruce trees free from mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Squeals of pigs necessary for fruitfulness of mangoes, i. 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Squirrels burnt in the Easter bonfires, i. 142, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stabbing a transformed witch or werewolf in order to compel him or her to reveal himself or herself, i. 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Staffordshire, the Yule log in, i. 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stamfordham, in Northumberland, need-fire at, i. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Starling, external soul of ogress in a, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stebbing, E. B., on <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus vestitus</foreign> in India, ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steinen, Professor K. von den, on the bull-roarer, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Stelis</foreign>, a kind of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sterile beasts passed through Midsummer fires, i. 203, 338</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sternberg, in Mecklenburg, need-fire at, i. 274</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stewart, Jonet, a wise woman, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stewart, W. Grant, on witchcraft, i. 342 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stheni, near Delphi, ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sticks-Charred'/>
<l>Sticks, charred, of bonfires, protect fields against hail, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, charred, of Candlemas bonfires, superstitious uses of, i. 131</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, charred, of Easter fire, superstitious uses of, i. 121;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preserve wheat from blight and mildew, 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, charred, of Midsummer bonfires, planted in the fields, i. 165, 166, 173, 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a charm against lightning and foul weather, 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept to make the cattle thrive, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thrown into wells to improve the water, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against thunder, 184, 192;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against lightning, 187, 188, 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, sacred, whittled, i. 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stiffness of back set down to witchcraft, i. 343 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stinging girls and young men with ants, i. 61, 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; with ants as a form of purification, i. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Stipiturus malachurus</foreign>, emu-wren, men's <q>brother</q> among the Kurnai, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stolen kail, divination by, i. 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stone, look of a girl at puberty thought to turn things to, i. 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Hairy, at Midsummer, 212;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precious, external soul of khan in a, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical, put into body of novice at initiation, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stones thrown into Midsummer fire, i. 183, 191, 212;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>placed round Midsummer fires, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried by persons on their heads at Midsummer, 205, 212;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Hallowe'en fires, divination by, 230 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 239, 240;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used for curing cattle, 324, 325;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sick people passed through holes in, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical, inserted by spirits in the body of a new medicine-man, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stoole, near Downpatrick, Midsummer ceremony at, i. 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stow, John, on Midsummer fires in London, i. 196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strabo, on the Hirpi Sorani, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the human sacrifices of the Celts, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strackerjan, L., on fear of witchcraft in Oldenburg, i. 343 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strap of wolf's hide used by were-wolves, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strathpeffer, in Ross-shire, i. 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strathspey, sheep passed through a hoop of rowan in, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Straw tied round trees to make them fruitful, i. 115</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Streams, menstruous women not allowed to cross running, i. 97;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire kindled between two running, 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strength of people bound up with their hair, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Striking or throwing blindfold, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Striped Petticoat Philosophy, The</hi>, i. 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stromberg Hill, burning wheel rolled down the, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strutt, Joseph, on Midsummer fires in England, i. 196</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stseelis Indians of British Columbia, dread and seclusion of menstruous women among the, i. 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stuart, Mrs. A., on withered mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Lake in British Columbia, i. 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stukeley, W., on a Christmas custom at York, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Styria, fern-seed on Christmas night in, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Styx, the passage of Aeneas across the, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Subincision at initiation of lads in Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sub-totems in Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sudan, ceremony of new fire in the, i. 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human hyaenas in, 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sudeten mountains in Silesia, i. 170</l>
</lg>

<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>

<lg>
<l>Suffering, intensity of, a means to break the spell of witchcraft, i. 304</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffolk, belief as to menstruous women in, i. 96 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>duck baked alive as a sacrifice in, 303 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suk of British East Africa, their dread of menstruous women, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Sultan of the Oleander,</q> i. 18</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumatra, the Minangkabauers of, i. 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Kooboos of, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Looboos of, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>totemism among the Battas of, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers in, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Summer, King of, chosen on St. Peter's Day, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sun, rule not to see the, i. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priest of the, uses a white umbrella, 20 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to shine on girls at puberty, 22, 35, 36, 37, 41, 44, 46, 47, 68;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be seen by Brahman boys for three days, 68 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impregnation of women by the, 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made to shine on women at marriage, 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sheep and lambs sacrificed to the, 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temple of the, at Cuzco, 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Birthday of the, at the winter solstice, 246;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christmas an old heathen festival of the birth of the, 331 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>symbolized by a wheel, 334 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 335;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the sign of the lion, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical virtues of plants at Midsummer derived from the, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the sign of Sagittarius, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>calls men to himself through death, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed procured by shooting at the sun on Midsummer Day, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ultimate cooling of the, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sun-charms, i. 331;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the solstitial and other ceremonial fires perhaps sun-charms, ii. <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sundal, in Norway, need-fire in, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunday, children born on a Sunday can see treasures in the earth, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Firebrands, i. 110</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; in Lent, the first, fire-festival on the, i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sung-yang, were-tiger in, i. 310</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunless, Prince, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunshine, use of fire as a charm to produce, i. 341 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Superb warbler, called women's <q>sister</q> among the Kurnai, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Superstitions, Index of, i. 270;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>about trees struck by lightning, ii. <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Surenthal in Switzerland, new fire made by friction at Midsummer in the, i. 169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sûrya, the sun-god, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sussex, cleft ash-trees used for the cure of rupture in, ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sutherland, the need-fire in, i. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sutherlandshire, sept of the Mackays, <q>the descendants of the seal,</q> in, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swabia, <q>burning the witch</q> in, i. 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of throwing lighted discs in, 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter fires in, 144 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom at eclipses in, 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Midsummer fires in, 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches as hares and horses in, 318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod in, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern-seed brought by Satan on Christmas night in, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swahili of East Africa, their ceremony of the new fire, i. 133, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth-trees among the, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their story of an African Samson, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swallows, stones found in stomachs of, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swan-woman, Tartar story of the, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swan's bone, used by menstruous women to drink out of, i. 48, 49, 50, 90, 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swans' song in a fairy tale, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swanton, J. R., quoted, i. 45 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweden, customs observed on Yule Night in, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter bonfires in, 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bonfires on the Eve of May Day in, 159, 336;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the need-fire in, 280;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Midsummer Brooms</q> in, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod in, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe to be shot or knocked down with stones in, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe a remedy for epilepsy in, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>medical use of mistletoe in, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe used as a protection against conflagration in, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe cut at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mystic properties ascribed to mistletoe on St. John's Eve in, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Balder's balefires in, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through a cleft oak as a cure for rupture or rickets in, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crawling through a hoop as a cure in, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitions about a parasitic rowan in, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Switzerland, Lenten fires in, i. 118 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>new fire kindled by friction of wood in, 169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 279 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 336;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>people warned against bathing at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the belief in witchcraft in, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by orpine at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sympathetic relation between cleft tree and person who has been passed through it, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>between man and animal, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syria, restrictions on menstruous women in, i. 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syrmia, the Yule log in, i. 262 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tabari, Arab chronicler, i. 82</l>
</lg>

<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>

<lg>
<l>Taboo conceived as a dangerous physical substance which needs to be insulated, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tabooed men, i. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; persons kept from contact with the ground, i. 2 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; things kept from contact with the ground, i. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; women, i. 8</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taboos regulating the lives of divine kings, i. 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>observed by priest of Earth in Southern Nigeria, 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tacitus, on human sacrifices offered by the ancient Germans, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the goddess Nerthus, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tahiti, king and queen of, not allowed to set foot on the ground, i. 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fire-walk in, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tahitians, the New Year of the, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tajan and Landak, districts of Dutch Borneo, i. 5, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talbot, P. Amaury, on external human souls in animals, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Talegi</foreign>, Motlav word for external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tales of maidens forbidden to see the sun, i. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talismans of cities, i. 83 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talmud, the, on menstruous women, i. 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamanaks of the Orinoco, their treatment of girls at puberty, i. 61 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tamaniu</foreign>, external soul in the Mota language, ii. <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamarisk, Isfendiyar slain with a branch of a, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tami, the, of German New Guinea, their rites of initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanganyika, Lake, tribes of, i. 24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanner, John, and the Shawnee sage, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tantad</foreign>, Midsummer bonfire, i. 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taoist treatise on the soul, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tapajos, tributary of the Amazon, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taphos besieged by Amphitryo, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tara, new fire in the King's house at, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tar-barrels, burning, swung round pole at Midsummer, i. 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt at Midsummer, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>procession with lighted, on Christmas Eve, 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarbolton, in Ayrshire, annual bonfire at, i. 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tartar stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tartars after a funeral leap over fire, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tattooing, medicinal use of, i. 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tay, Loch, i. 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tcheou, dynasty of China, i. 137</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teak, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loranthus</foreign> on, ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teanlas, Hallowe'en fires in Lancashire, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teeth filed as preliminary to marriage, i. 68 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tegner, Swedish poet, on the burning of Balder, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tein Econuch</foreign>, <q>forlorn fire,</q> need-fire, i. 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tein-eigin</foreign> (<foreign rend='italic'>teine-eigin</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>tin-egin</foreign>), need-fire, i. 147, 148, 289, 291, 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Teine Bheuil</foreign>, fire of Beul, need-fire, i. 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tent burnt at Midsummer, i. 215</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Termonde in Belgium, Midsummer fires at, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tessier, on the burning wheel at Konz, i. 164 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tests undergone by girls at puberty, i. 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teutates, Celtic god, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teutonic stories of the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Texas, the Toukaway Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Thahu</foreign>, curse or pollution, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thays of Tonquin, their customs after a burial, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thebes, in Greece, effigies of Judas burnt at Easter in, i. 130 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, his denunciation of a heathen practice, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophrastus on the different kinds of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Therapia, effigies of Judas burnt at Easter in, i. 131</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thief wears a toad's heart to escape detection, i. 302 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thiers, J. B., on the Yule log, i. 250;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on gathering herbs at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on belief concerning wormwood, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thieves detected by divining-rod, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thighs of diseased cattle cut off and hung up as a remedy, i. 296 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thirty years' cycle of the Druids, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thlinkeet Indians. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Tlingit'>Tlingit</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas, N. W., ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas the Rhymer, verses ascribed to, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thompson Indians of British Columbia, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their dread of menstruous women, 89 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prayer of adolescent girl among the, 98 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed invulnerability of initiated men among the, ii. <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ideas as to wood of trees struck by lightning, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomsdorf, in Germany, i. 99</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomson, Basil, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thonga, the, of Delagoa Bay, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>will not use the wood of trees struck by lightning, ii. <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>think lightning caused by a bird, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>

<lg>
<l>Thor, a Norse god, i. 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thorn, external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe on a, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bushes used to keep off ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thought, the web of, ii. <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Threatening fruit-trees, i. 114</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Three Holy Kings, the divining-rod baptized in the name of the, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; leaps over bonfire, i. 214, 215</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Threshold, shavings from the, burnt, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrice to crawl under a bramble as a cure, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to pass through a wreath of woodbine, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Throwing or striking blindfold, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Thrumalun'/>
<l>Thrumalun, a mythical being who kills and resuscitates novices at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Daramulun'>Daramulun</ref> <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> <ref target='Index-Thuremlin'>Thuremlin</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrushes deposit seeds of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Thunder'/>
<l>Thunder associated with the oak, i. 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires a protection against, 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charred sticks of Midsummer bonfire a protection against, 184, 192;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ashes of Midsummer fires a protection against, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brands from the Midsummer fires a protection against, 191;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>certain flowers at Midsummer a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sound of bull-roarers thought to imitate, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Lightning'>Lightning</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thunder and lightning, the Yule log a protection against, i. 248, 249, 250, 252, 253, 254, 258, 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bonfires a protection against, 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>smoke of Midsummer herbs a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vervain a protection against, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>name given to bull-roarers, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and the oak, the Aryan god of the, i. 265</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; -besom,</q> name applied to mistletoe and other bushy excrescences on trees, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against thunderbolts, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -bird, the mythical, i. 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; -bolts,</q> name given to celts, i. 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; -poles,</q> oak sticks charred in Easter bonfires, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thunderstorms and hail caused by witches, i. 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer flowers a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Thuremlin'/>
<l>Thuremlin, a mythical being who kills lads at initiation and restores them to life, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Daramulun'>Daramulun</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thuringia, custom at eclipses in, i. 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 169, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Schweina in, i. 265;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief as to magical properties of the fern in, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thursday, Maundy, i. 125 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thurso, witches as cats at, i. 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thurston, E., on the fire-walk, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thyme burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 213;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wild, gathered on Midsummer Day, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tibet, sixty years' cycle in, ii. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ticunas of the Amazon, ordeal of young men among the, i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiger, a Batta totem, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiger's skin at inauguration of a king, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timmes of Sierra Leone, their secret society, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tinneh'/>
<l>Tinneh Indians, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their dread and seclusion of menstruous women, 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tinnevelly, the Kappiliyans of, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tipperary, county of, were-wolves in, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>woman burnt as a witch in, 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiree, the need-fire in, i. 148;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Beltane cake in, 149;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witch as sheep in, 316</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tivor</foreign>, god or victim, i. 103 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiyans of Malabar, their seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tlactga or Tlachtga in Ireland, i. 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tlingit'/>
<l>Tlingit (Thlinkeet) Indians of Alaska, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tlokoala, a secret society of the Nootka Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toad, witch in form of a, i. 323</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; clan, ii. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -stools thrown into Midsummer bonfires as a charm, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toad's heart worn by a thief to prevent detection, i. 302 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toads burnt alive in Devonshire, i. 302</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toaripi of New Guinea, their rule as to menstruous women, i. 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tobas, Indian tribe of the Gran Chaco, their custom of secluding girls at puberty, i. 59</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tobelorese of Halmahera, their rites of initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toboengkoe, the, of Central Celebes, custom observed by widower among the, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tocandeira</foreign>, native name for the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cryptocerus atratus</foreign>, F., ant, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Todas of the Neilgherry Hills, their ceremony of the new fire, i. 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tokio, the fire-walk at, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tokoelawi of Central Celebes, custom observed by mourners among the, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tomori, the Gulf of, in Celebes, i. 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tongue of medicine-man, hole in, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>

<lg>
<l>Tonquin, the Thays of, their burial customs, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tonwan</foreign>, magical influence of medicine-bag, ii. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tooth of novice knocked out at initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toradjas of Central Celebes, were-wolves among the, i. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom at the smelting of iron, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Torch-Races'/>
<l>Torch-races at Easter, i. 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Midsummer, 175</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torches interpreted as imitations of lightning, i. 340 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, burning, carried round folds and lands at Midsummer, i. 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>applied to fruit-trees to fertilize them, 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Demeter, i. 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, processions with lighted, i. 141, 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>through fields, gardens, orchards, and streets, 107 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 110 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 113 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 179, 339 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Midsummer, 179;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Christmas Eve, 266</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torres Straits Islands, seclusion of girls at puberty in the, i. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 39 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread and seclusion of women at menstruation in the, 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers in the, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tortoises, external human souls lodged in, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torture, judicial, of criminals, witches, and wizards, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totem, transference of man's soul to his, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed effect of killing a, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the receptacle in which a man keeps his external soul, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the individual or personal, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Sex-Totems'>Sex totem</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; animal, artificial, novice at initiation brought back by, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transformation of man into his, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; clans and secret societies, related to each other, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; names kept secret, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; plants among the Fans, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totemism, suggested theory of, ii. <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totems, honorific, of the Carrier Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personal, among the North American Indians, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>multiplex, of the Australians, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Touch of menstruous women thought to convey pollution, i. 87, 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toukaway Indians of Texas, ceremony of mimic wolves among the, ii. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toulouse, torture of sorcerers at, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Touraine, Midsummer fires in, i. 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Train, Joseph, on Beltane fires in Isle of Man, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transference of a man's soul to his totem, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transformation of men into wolves at the full moon, i. 314 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of witches into animals, 315 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of men into animals, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of man into his totem animal, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transmigration of soul of ruptured person into cleft oak-tree, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of human souls into totem animals, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transylvania, the Roumanians of, i. 13;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story of the external soul among the Saxons of, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief as to children born on a Sunday in, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Travancore, women deemed liable to be attacked by demons in, i. 24 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Pulayars of, 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Travexin, in the Vosges, witch as hare at, i. 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Treasures guarded by demons, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found by means of fern-seed, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>discovered by divining-rod, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revealed by springwort, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revealed by mistletoe, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bloom in the earth on Midsummer Eve, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trebius, on the springwort, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tree burnt in the Midsummer bonfire, i. 173 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 180, 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -creeper (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Climacteris scandens</foreign>), women's <q>sister</q> among the Yuin, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -spirit, effigies of, burnt in bonfires, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human representatives of, put to death, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human representative of the, perhaps originally burnt at the fire-festivals, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; spirits bless women with offspring, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the form of serpents, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trees, men changed into, by look of menstruous women, i. 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in spring fires, 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 116, 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in Midsummer fires, 173 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 185, 192, 193, 209;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt at Holi festival in India, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in bonfires, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lives of people bound up with, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hair of children tied to, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fate of families or individuals bound up with, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creeping through cleft trees as cure for various maladies, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fire thought by savages to be stored like sap in, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>struck by lightning, superstitions about, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and plants as life-indices, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tréfoir</foreign>, the Yule log, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tréfouet</foreign>, the Yule log, i. 252 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tregonan, in Cornwall, Midsummer fires on, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trench cut in ground at Beltane, i. 150, 152</l>
</lg>

<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>

<lg>
<l>Trevelyan, Marie, on Midsummer fires, i. 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Hallowe'en, 226 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on St. John's wort in Wales, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on burnt sacrifices in Wales, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Treves, the archbishop of, i. 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Triangle of reeds, passage of mourners through a, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trie-Chateau, dolmen near Gisors, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trilles, Father H., on the theory of the external soul among the Fans, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trinidad, the fire-walk in, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Triumphal arch, suggested origin of the, ii. <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trolls, efforts to keep off the, i. 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and evil spirits abroad on Midsummer Eve, 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer flowers a protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rendered powerless by mistletoe, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>True Steel, whose heart was in a bird, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trumpets sounded at initiation of young men, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; penny, at the feast of the Nativity of the Virgin, i. 221, 222</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tsetsaut tribe of British Columbia, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tsimshian girls at puberty, rules observed by, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tubuan or Tubuvan, man disguised as cassowary in Duk-duk ceremonies, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tugeri or Kaya-Kaya of Dutch New Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their use of bull-roarers, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tui Nkualita, a Fijian chief, founder of the fire-walk, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tulsi</foreign> plant, its miraculous virtue, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tummel, the valley of the, i. 231</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tunis, New Year fires at, i. 217;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gold sickle and fillet said to be found in, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tunnel, creeping through a, as a remedy for an epidemic, i. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turf, sick children and cattle passed through holes in, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turks of Siberia, marriage custom of the, i. 75</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turukhinsk region, Samoyeds of the, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tutu, island of Torres Strait, treatment of girls at puberty in, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twanyirika, a spirit whose voice is heard in the sound of the bull-roarer, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kills and resuscitates lads at initiation, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twelfth Day, Eve of, the bonfires of, i. 107;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>processions with torches on, 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Night, the King of the Bean on, i. 153 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cake, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log on, 248, 250, 251;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod cut on, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twelve Nights, remains of Yule log scattered on fields during the, i. 248;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>between Christmas and Epiphany, were-wolves abroad during the, 310 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Twice born</q> Brahman, ii. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twin brothers in ritual, i. 278</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -producing virtue ascribed to a kind of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twins and their afterbirths counted as four children, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twins, father of, i. 24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Two Brothers, ancient Egyptian story of the, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyrol, <q>burning the witch</q> in the, i. 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires to burn the witches in the, 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in the, 172 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical plants culled on Midsummer Eve in the, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's wort in the, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mountain arnica gathered at Midsummer in the, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of four-leaved clover in the, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dwarf-elder gathered at Midsummer in the, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divining-rod in the, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe used to open all locks in the, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief as to mistletoe growing on a hazel in the, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyrolese peasants use fern-seed to discover buried gold and to prevent money from decreasing, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; story of a girl who was forbidden to see the sun, i. 72</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ualaroi, the, of the Darling River, their belief as to initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uaupes of Brazil, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Uganda'/>
<l>Uganda, kings of, not allowed to set foot on ground, i. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life of the king of, bound up with barkcloth trees, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passage of sick man through a cleft stick or a narrow opening in, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure for lightning-stroke in, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Baganda'>Baganda</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uisnech, in County Meath, great fair at, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uist, Beltane cakes in, i. 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, North, need-fire in, i. 293 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, South, fairies at Hallowe'en in, i. 226;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>salt cake at Hallowe'en in, 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uiyumkwi tribe, their treatment of girls at puberty, i. 39 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ukami, in German East Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ukpong</foreign>, external soul in Calabar, ii. <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ulad Bu Aziz, Arab tribe in Morocco, their Midsummer fires, i. 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Umbrellas in ritual, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uncleanness, ceremonial, among the Indians of Costa Rica, i. 65 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and sanctity not clearly differentiated in the primitive mind, 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>

<lg>
<l>Uncleanness of women at menstruation, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Menstruous'>Menstruous</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unguent made from fat of crocodiles and snakes, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Universal healer, name given to mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unlucky, Midsummer Day regarded as, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; children passed through narrow openings, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unmasking a were-wolf or witch by wounding him or her, i. 315, 321</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unmatjera tribe of Central Australia, their rites of initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>initiation of a medicine-man in the, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Up-helly-a', at Lerwick, i. 269 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uraons. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Oraons'>Oraons</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urabunna tribe of Central Australia, their rites of initiation, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ustrels</foreign>, a species of vampyre in Bulgaria, i. 284</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vagney, in the Vosges, Christmas custom at, i. 254</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vagueness and inconsistency of primitive thought, ii. <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Val di Ledro, effigy burnt in the, at Carnival, i. 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valais, the canton of, Midsummer fires in, i. 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cursing a mist in, 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valenciennes, Lenten fire-custom at, i. 114 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valentines at bonfires, i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vallancey, General Charles, on Hallowe'en customs in Ireland, i. 241 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vallée des Bagnes, cursing a mist in the, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vampyres, need-fire kindled as a safeguard against, i. 284 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vapour bath, i. 40</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Var, Midsummer fires in the French department of, i. 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Varro, on the fire-walk of the Hirpi Sorani, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vase, external soul of habitual criminal in a, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vecoux, in the Vosges, i. 254</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vedic hymns, the fire-god Agni in the, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vegetables at Midsummer, their fertilizing influence on women, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vegetation, spirit of, burnt in effigy, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reasons for burning, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaf-clad representative of, burnt, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -spirits, W. Mannhardt's view that the victims burnt by the Druids represented, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Velten, C., on an African Balder, ii. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Verbascum</foreign>, mullein, gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to the sun, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Verbena officinalis</foreign>, vervain, gathered at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Verges, in the Jura, Lenten fire-custom at, i. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vermin exorcized with torches, i. 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Versipellis</foreign>, a were-wolf, i. 314 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vervain, garlands or chaplets of, at Midsummer, i. 162, 163, 165;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in the Midsummer fires, 195;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in exorcism, ii. 62 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against thunder and lightning, sorcerers, demons, and thieves, 62;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered at Midsummer, 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vespasian family, the oak of the, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vesper-bell on Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vessels, special, used by menstruous women, i. 86, 90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used by girls at puberty, 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vesta, sacred fire in the temple of, annually kindled, i. 138;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fire of, at Rome, fed with oak-wood, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vestal Virgins relit the sacred fire of Vesta, i. 138;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their rule of celibacy, 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vestini, the ancient, i. 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Veth, P. J., on the Golden Bough, ii. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victims, human, claimed by St. John on St. John's Day (Midsummer Day), i. 27, 29;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>claimed by water at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victoria, aborigines of, their custom as to emu fat, i. 13;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their dread of women at menstruation, 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sex totems in, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vidovec in Croatia, Midsummer fires at, i. 178</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vienne, department of, Midsummer fires in the, i. 191;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Vilavou</foreign>, New Year's Men, name given to newly initiated lads in Fiji, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Village surrounded with a ring of fire as a protection against an evil spirit, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vimeux, Lenten fires at, i. 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vintage, omens of, i. 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vipers sacred to balsam trees in Arabia, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virbius at Nemi interpreted as an oak-spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgil, on the fire-walk of the Hirpi Sorani, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his account of the Golden Bough, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgin, the, blesses the fruits of the earth, i. 118;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the hair of the Holy, found in ashes of Midsummer fire, 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 191;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>feast of the Nativity of the, 220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and child supposed to sit on the Yule log, 253 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>

<lg>
<l>Virgins of the Sun at Cuzco, i. 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Vestal, and the sacred fire, 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virginia, rites of initiation among the Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virginity, test of, by blowing up a flame, i. 137 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virility supposed to be lost by contact with menstruous women, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum album</foreign>, common mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viscum quernum</foreign>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Visiter, the Christmas, i. 261 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 263, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Viti Levu, the largest of the Fijian Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitrolles, bathing at Midsummer in, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vogel Mountains, i. 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Voigtland, bonfires on Walpurgis Night in, i. 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tree and person thrown into water on St. John's Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by flowers on Midsummer Eve in, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mountain arnica gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wild thyme gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precautions against witches in, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Volga, the Cheremiss of the, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Volksmarsen in Hesse, Easter fires at, i. 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Voluspa</hi>, the Sibyl's prophecy in the, i. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Voralberg, in the Tyrol, <q>burning the witch</q> at, i. 116</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vorges, near Laon, Midsummer fires at, i. 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vosges, Midsummer fires in the, i. 188, 336;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in the, 254;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cats burnt alive on Shrove Tuesday in the, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mountains, Lenten fires in the, i. 109;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches as hares in the, 318;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magic herbs culled on Eve of St. John in the, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Vrid-eld</foreign>, need-fire, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vultures, lives of persons bound up with those of, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wadai, ceremony of the new fire in, i. 134, 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wadoe, the, of German East Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wafiomi, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 28</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wagstadt in Silesia, Judas ceremony at, i. 146 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wajagga, the, of German East Africa, birth-plants among the, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wakelbura tribe (Australia), dread and seclusion of women at menstruation in the, i. 78</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wakondyo, their custom as to the afterbirth, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wales'/>
<l>Wales, Snake Stones in, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Beltane fires and cakes in, 155 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires in, 200 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at Hallowe'en in, 229, 240 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hallowe'en fires in, 239 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 258;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt sacrifices to stop cattle-disease in, 301;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches as hares in, 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief as to witches in, 321 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bewitched things burnt in, 322;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by flowers on Midsummer Eve in, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's wort in, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe to be shot or knocked down with stones in, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe cut at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe used to make the dairy thrive in, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Beltane fire kindled by the friction of oak-wood in, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walhalla, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walking over fire as a rite, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walls, fortified, of the ancient Gauls, i. 267 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walnut, branches of, passed across Midsummer fires and fastened on cattle-sheds, i. 191</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walos of Senegambia, their belief as to a sort of mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walpi, Pueblo Indian village, use of bull-roarers at, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walpurgis Day, i. 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Night, witches abroad on, i. 159 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a witching time, 295;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precautions against witches on, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches active on, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wangen in Baden, Lenten fire-custom at, i. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wanyamwezi, their belief as to wounded crocodiles, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warlock, the invulnerable, stories of, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warriors tabooed, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warwickshire, the Yule log in, i. 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Washamba, the, of German East Africa, their custom at circumcision, ii. <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Washington State, seclusion of girls at puberty among the Indians of, i. 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wasmes, processions with torches at, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wasp, external soul of enchanter in a, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wasps, young men stung with, as an ordeal, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wassgow mountains, the need-fire in the, i. 271</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Water from sacred wells, i. 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>menstruous women not to go near, 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrated at Easter, 122 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 125;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>turned to wine at Easter, 124;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>improved by charred sticks of Midsummer fires, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Midsummer, people drenched with, 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>heated in need-fire and sprinkled on cattle, 289;</l>
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>claims human victims at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to acquire certain marvellous properties at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>haunted and dangerous at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Water of life, ii. <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of springs thought to acquire medicinal qualities on Midsummer Eve, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, rites of, at Midsummer festival in Morocco, i. 216;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at New Year in Morocco, 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; spirits, offerings to, at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wayanas of French Guiana, ordeals among the, i. 63 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weariness, magical plants placed in shoes a charm against, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weaver, the wicked, of Rotenburg, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weeks, Rev. John H., on rites of initiation on the Lower Congo, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weeping of girl at puberty, i. 24, 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weidenhausen, in Westphalia, the Yule log at, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wells, sacred, in Scotland, i. 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>menstruous women kept from, 81, 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charred sticks of Midsummer fires thrown into, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crowned with flowers at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, holy, resorted to on Midsummer Eve in Ireland, i. 205 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Lord of the, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Welsh cure for whooping-cough, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; name, alleged, for mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Wales'>Wales</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wends, their faith in Midsummer herbs, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Saxony, their idea as to wood of trees struck by lightning, ii. <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Spreewald gather herbs and flowers at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief as to the divining-rod, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wensley-dale, the Yule log in, i. 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Were-tigers in China and the East Indies, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 313 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wolf, how a man becomes a, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story in Petronius, 313 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wolves compelled to resume their human shape by wounds inflicted on them, i. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>put to death, 311;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the full moon, 314 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and witches, parallelism between, 315, 321</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Werner, Miss Alice, on a soul-box, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on African Balders, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westenberg, J. C., on the Batta theory of souls, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westermarck, Dr. Edward, on New Year rites in Morocco, i. 218;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Midsummer festival in North Africa, 219;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his theory that the fires of the fire-festivals are purificatory, 329 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on water at Midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westphalia, Easter fires in, i. 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 248;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination by orpine at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>camomile gathered at Midsummer in, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Midsummer log of oak in, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wetteren, wicker giants at, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Wetterpfähle</foreign>, oak sticks charred in Easter bonfires, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wexford, Midsummer fires in, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whalton, in Northumberland, Midsummer fires at, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wheat thrown on the man who brings in the Christmas log, i. 260, 262, 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protected against mice by mugwort, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wheel, fire kindled by the rotation of a, i. 177, 179, 270, 273, 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 292, 335 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a symbol of the sun, i. 334 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 335;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a charm against witchcraft, 345 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, burning, rolled down hill, i. 116, 117 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 119, 141, 143, 161, 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 166, 173, 174, 201, 328, 334, 337 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 338;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thrown into the air at Midsummer, 179;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rolled over fields at Midsummer to fertilize them, 191, 340 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps intended to burn witches, 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wherry, Mrs., i. 108 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whips cracked to drive away witches, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitby, the Yule log at, i. 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White, Rev. G. E., on passing through a ring of red-hot iron, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on passing sheep through a rifted rock, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White birds, ten, external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bulls sacrificed by Druids at cutting the mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; chalk, bodies of newly initiated lads coated with, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; clay, bodies of novices at initiation smeared with, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cloth, fern-seed caught in a, i. 65, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>springwort caught in a, i. 70;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe caught in a, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to catch the Midsummer bloom of the oak, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cock burnt in Midsummer bonfire, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; herb, external souls of two brothers in a, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; horse, effigy of, carried through Midsummer fire, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sunday, i. 117 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whiteborough, in Cornwall, Midsummer fires on, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whooping-cough cured by crawling under a bramble, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bulgarian
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
cure for, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>child passed under an ass as a cure for, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wicked Sower, driving away the, i. 107, 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wicken (rowan) tree, a protection against witchcraft, i. 326, 327 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wicker giants at popular festivals in Europe, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in summer bonfires, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiesensteig, in Swabia, witch as horse at, i. 319</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Wild fire,</q> the need-fire, i. 272, 273, 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilde, Lady, her description of Midsummer fires in Ireland, i. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilken, G. A., on the external soul, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilkes, Charles, on seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Will-fire, or need-fire, i. 288, 297</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Willow, mistletoe growing on, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through a cleft willow-tree as a cure, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crawling through a hoop of willow branches as a cure, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crawling under the root of a willow as a cure, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Orpheus and the, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wimmer, F., on the various sorts of mistletoe known to the ancients, ii. <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winamwanga, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom as to lightning-kindled fire, ii. <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wind, bull-roarers sounded to raise a, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Window, magic flowers to be passed through the, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wine thought to be spoiled by menstruous women, i. 96</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winenthal in Switzerland, new fire made by friction at Midsummer in the, i. 169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winnebagoes, ritual of death and resurrection among the, ii. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winnowing-basket, divination by, i. 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winter solstice, Persian festival of fire at the, i. 269</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Winter's Grandmother,</q> burning the, i. 116</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winterbottom, Thomas, on a secret society of Sierra Leone, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wintun Indians of California, seclusion of girls among the, i. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witch, burning the, i. 116, 118 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigy of, burnt in bonfire, 159;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compelled to appear by burning an animal or part of an animal which she has bewitched, 303, 305, 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in form of a toad, 323.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Witches'>Witches</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witch, MacCrauford, the great arch, i. 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; -shot,</q> a sudden stiffness in the back, i. 343 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witch's herb, St. John's wort, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; nest,</q> a tangle of birch-branches, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Witchcraft'/>
<l>Witchcraft, bonfires a protection against, i. 108, 109;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holy water a protection against, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cattle driven through Midsummer fire as a protection against, 175;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burs and mugwort a preservative against, 177, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires a protection against, i. 185, 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a broom a protection against, 210;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire kindled to counteract, 280, 292 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 293, 295;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Devonshire, 302;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>great dread of, in Europe, 340;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fire-festivals regarded as a protection against, 342;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stiffness in the back attributed to, 343 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 345;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>colic and sore eyes attributed to, 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a wheel a charm against, 345 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be the source of almost all calamities, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaping over bonfires as a protection against, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its treatment by the Christian Church, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and sorcery, Midsummer herbs and flowers a protection against, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. John's wort a protection against, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dwarf-elder used to detect, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fern root a protection against, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe a protection against, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatal to milk and butter, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak log a protection against, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the rowan a protection against, i. 327 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children passed through a ring of yarn as a protection against, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a <q>witch's nest</q> (tangle of birch-branches) a protection against, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Sorcery'>Sorcery</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Witches'/>
<l>Witches not allowed to touch the bare ground, i. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt and beheaded, 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigies of, burnt in bonfires, 107, 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 118 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 342, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charm to protect fields against, i. 121;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Beltane fires a protection against, 154;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cast spells on cattle, 154;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>steal milk from cows, 154, 176, 343, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the form of hares and cats, i. 157, 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 316 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 317, 318, 319 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt on May Day, i. 157, 159, 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires to burn the witches on the Eve of May Day (Walpurgis Night), 159 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abroad on Walpurgis Night, i. 159 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept out by crosses, 160 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driving away the, 160, 170, 171;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resort to the Blocksberg, 171;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires a protection against, 176, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>steal milk
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
and butter at Midsummer, 185;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Midsummer Eve, 210, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>active on Hallowe'en and May Day, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in Hallowe'en fires, i. 232 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abroad at Hallowe'en, 226, 245;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log a protection against, 258;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to  cause cattle disease, 302 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transformed into animals, 315 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as cockchafers, 322;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>come to borrow, 322, 323, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cause hail and thunder-storms, i. 344;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brought down from the clouds by shots and smoke, 345 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burning missiles hurled at, 345;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt or banned by fire, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gather noxious plants on Midsummer Eve, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gather St. John's wort on St. John's Eve, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purple loosestrife a protection against, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured in India, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>animal familiars of, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Burning-The-Witches'><q>Burning the Witches</q></ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witches at Ipswich, i. 304 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and hares in Yorkshire, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and were-wolves, parallelism between, i. 315. 321</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and wizards thought to keep their strength in their hair, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>put to death by the Aztecs, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and wolves the two great foes dreaded by herdsmen in Europe, i. 343</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash;, Burning the,</q> a popular name for the fires of the festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witches' Sabbath on the Eve of May Day and Midsummer Eve, i. 171 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 181, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Withershins,</q> against the sun, in curses and excommunication, i. 234</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witurna, a spirit whose voice is heard in the sound of the bull-roarer, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wizards gather baleful herbs on the Eve of St. John, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gather purple loosestrife at Midsummer, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>animal familiars of, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woden, Odin, or Othin, the father of Balder, i. 101, 102, 103 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolf, Brotherhood of the Green, at Jumièges in Normandy, i. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; clan in North-Western America, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; masks worn by members of a Wolf secret society, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; society among the Nootka Indians, rite of initiation into the, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolf's hide, strap of, used by were-wolves, i. 310<hi rend='italic'> n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolfeck, in Austria, leaf-clad mummer on Midsummer Day at, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolfenbüttel, need-fire near, i. 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolves and witches, the two great foes dreaded by herdsmen in Europe, i. 343</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woman burnt alive as a witch in Ireland in 1895, i. 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Women in hard labour, charm to help, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>after childbirth tabooed, 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>who do not menstruate supposed to make gardens barren, 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impregnated by the sun, 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impregnated by the moon, 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at menstruation painted red, 78;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leap over Midsummer bonfires to ensure an easy delivery, 194, 339;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fertilized by tree-spirits, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>barren, hope to conceive through fertilizing influence of vegetables, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creep through a rifted rock to obtain an easy delivery, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to see bull-roarers, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Menstruous'>Menstruous women</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wonghi or Wonghibon tribe of New South Wales, ritual of death and resurrection at initiation among the, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wood, the King of the, at Nemi, i. 2, 285, 286, 295, 302, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woodbine, sick children passed through a wreath of, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woodpecker brings the mythical springwort, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wootton-Wawen, in Warwickshire, the Yule log at, i. 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Working for need-fire,</q> a proverb, i. 287 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worms, popular cure for, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wormwood (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Artemisia absinthium</foreign>), ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt to stupefy witches, i. 345;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitions concerning, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref><hi rend='italic'> n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worship of ancestors in Fiji, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the oak explained by the frequency with which oaks are struck by lightning, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worth, R. N., on burnt sacrifices in Devonshire, i. 302</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worthen, in Shropshire, the Yule log at, i. 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wotjobaluk, of South-Eastern Australia, sex totems among the, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wounding were-wolves in order to compel them to resume their human shape, i. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wounds, St. John's wort a balm for, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wreath of woodbine, sick children passed through a, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wreaths of flowers thrown across the Midsummer fires, i. 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitious uses made of the singed wreaths, 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hung over doors and windows at Midsummer, 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wurtemberg, Midsummer fires in, i. 166;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaf-clad mummer at Midsummer in, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Würzburg, Midsummer fires at, i. 165</l>
</lg>

<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>

<lg>
<l>Yabim, the, of New Guinea, girls at puberty secluded among the, i. 35;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of initiation among the, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yaguas, Indians of the Amazon, girls at puberty secluded among the, i. 59</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yakut shamans keep their external souls in animals, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yakuts leap over fire after a burial, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yam, island of Torres Strait, treatment of girls at puberty in, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yap, seclusion of girls at puberty in the island of, i. 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yaraikanna, the, of Northern Queensland, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yarn, divination by, i. 235, 240, 241, 243;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sick children passed through a ring of, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yarra river in Victoria, i. 92 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Year called a fire, i. 137</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yellow Day of Beltane, i. 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; snow, the year of the, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yibai, tribal subdivision of the Coast Murring tribe, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yoke, purification by passing under a, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ancient Italian practice of passing conquered enemies under a, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>York, custom formerly observed at Christmas in the cathedral at, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yorkshire, belief as to menstruous women in, i. 96 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Beal-fires on Midsummer Eve in, 198;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule log in, 256 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>need-fire in, 286 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witch as hare in, 317, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yoruba-speaking negroes of the Slave Coast, use of bull-roarers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Young, Hugh W., on the rampart of Burghead, i. 268 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Young, Issobell, buries ox and cat alive, i. 325</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ypres, wicker giants at, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yucatan, fire-walk among the Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yuin, the, of South-Eastern Australia, their sex totems, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>totem names kept secret among, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yukon, the Lower, i. 55</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yule cake, i. 257, 259, 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; candle, i. 255, 256, 260</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; log, i. 247 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Germany, 247 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made of oak-wood, 248, 250, 251, 257, 258, 259, 260, 263, 264 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against conflagration, i. 248 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 250, 255, 256, 258;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against thunder and lightning, 248, 249, 250, 252, 253, 254, 258, 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Switzerland, 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Belgium, 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in France, 249 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>helps cows to calve, 250, 338;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in England, 255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Wales, 258;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Servians, 258 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against witches, 258;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Albania, 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>privacy of the ceremonial of the, 328;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explained as a sun-charm, 332;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made of fir, beech, holly, yew, crab-tree, or olive, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yule Night in Sweden, customs observed on, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yuracares of Bolivia, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 57 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Zadrooga,</hi> Servian house-community, i. 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zambesi, the Barotse of the, i. 28</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zapotecs, supreme pontiff of the, not allowed to set foot on ground, i. 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sun not allowed to shine on him, i. 19;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief that their lives were bound up with those of animals, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zemmur, the, of Morocco, their Midsummer custom, i. 215</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zerdusht and Isfendiyar, i. 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeus and his sacred oak at Dodona, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wood of white poplar used at Olympia in sacrificing to, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Danae, i. 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Hephaestus, i. 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zimbales, a province of the Philippines, superstition as to a parasitic plant in, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zoroaster, on the uncleanness of women</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at menstruation, i. 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zoznegg, in Baden, Easter fires at, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zulus, seclusion of girls at puberty among the, i. 22, 30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fumigate their gardens with medicated smoke, 337;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom of fumigating sick cattle, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief as to ancestral spirits incarnate in serpents, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zülz, in Silesia, Midsummer fires at, i. 170</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zuñi Indians of New Mexico, their new fires at the solstices, i. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of bull-roarers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zurich, effigies burnt at, i. 120</l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
